The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Letter of the Contract, by Basil King

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Letter of the Contract

Author: Basil King

Release Date: January 25, 2007 [EBook #20443]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LETTER OF THE CONTRACT ***




Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





[Illustration: See p. 29 "Can't you see that my heart's breaking, too?"
She looked him in the face, shaking her head, sadly. "No, I can't see
that."]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE LETTER OF THE CONTRACT

BY
BASIL KING

AUTHOR OF
The Inner Shrine

ILLUSTRATED

HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
NEW YORK AND LONDON
MCMXIV

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOKS BY THE AUTHOR OF "THE INNER SHRINE"

BASIL KING

THE LETTER OF THE CONTRACT. Ill'd
THE WAY HOME. Illustrated
THE WILD OLIVE. Illustrated
THE INNER SHRINE. Illustrated
THE STREET CALLED STRAIGHT. Ill'd
LET NOT MAN PUT ASUNDER. Post 8vo
IN THE GARDEN OF CHARITY. Post 8vo
THE STEPS OF HONOR. Post 8vo
THE GIANT'S STRENGTH. Post 8vo

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK
COPYRIGHT, 1914. BY HARPER & BROTHERS
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA PUBLISHED AUGUST, 1914

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

 CHAP.                                 PAGE

    I. TRANSGRESSION                      1
   II. RESENTMENT                        41
  III. REPROACH                          83
   IV. DANGER                           134
    V. PENALTY                          160

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

ILLUSTRATIONS

"Can't You See that My Heart's Breaking, Too?" She Looked Him in the
Face, Shaking Her Head, Sadly. "No, I Can't See That"        Frontispiece

He Turned from the Girl to His Wife. "I'm Willing to Explain
Anything You Like--as Far as I Can"                               Page 26

"Oh, Chip, Go Away! I Can't Stand Any More--Now." "Do You Mean
that You'll See Me--Later--when We're in London?"                   " 155

Edith was Standing in the Doorway, the Man Behind Her. "Chip,
Mr. Lacon Knows We Met in England"                                  " 192

-----------------------------------------------------------------------




THE LETTER OF THE CONTRACT

I

TRANSGRESSION


It was strange to think that if, on finishing her coffee in her room,
she had looked in on the children, as she generally did, instead of
going down to the drawing-room to write a note, her whole life might
have been different. "Why didn't I?" was the question she often asked
herself in the succeeding years, only to follow it with the reflection:
"But perhaps it would have happened in any case. Since the fact was
there, I must have come to know it--in the long run."

The note was an unimportant one. She could have sent it by a servant at
any minute of the day. The very needlessness of writing it at once, so
that her husband could post it as he went to his office, gave to the act
something of the force of fate.

Everything that morning, when she came to think of it, had something of
the force of fate. Why, on entering the drawing-room, hadn't she gone
straight to her desk, according to her intention, if it wasn't that fate
intervened? As a matter of fact, she went to the oriel window looking
down into Fifth Avenue, with vague thoughts of the weather. It was one
of those small Scotch corner windows that show you both sides of the
street at once. It was so much the favorite conning-spot of the family
that she advanced to it from habit.

And yet, if she had gone to her desk, that girl might have disappeared
before the lines of the note were penned. As it was, the girl was there,
standing as she had stood on other occasions--three or four, at
least--between the two little iron posts that spaced off the opening for
foot-passengers into the Park. She was looking up at the house in the
way Edith had noticed before--not with the scrutiny of one who wishes to
see, but with the forlorn patience of the unobtrusive creature hoping to
be seen.

In a neat gray suit of the fashion of 1904 and squirrel furs she was the
more unobtrusive because of a background of light snow. She was
pathetically unobtrusive. Not that she seemed poor; she suggested,
rather, some one lost or dazed or partially blotted out. People glanced
at her as they hurried by. There were some who turned and glanced a
second time. She might have been a person with a sorrow--a love-sorrow.
At that thought Edith's heart went out to her in sympathy. She herself
was so happy, with a happiness that had grown more intense each month,
each week, each day, of her six years of married life, that it filled
her imagination with a blissful, pitying pain to think that other women
suffered.

The pity was sincere, and the bliss came from the knowledge of her
security. She felt it wonderful to have such a sense of safety as that
she experienced in gazing across the street at the girl's wistful face.
It was like the overpowering thankfulness with which a man on a rock
looks on while others drown. It wasn't callousness; it was only an
appreciation of mercies. She was genuinely sorry for the girl, if the
girl needed sorrow; but she didn't see what she could do to help her.
It was well known that out in that life of New York--and of the world at
large--there were tempests of passion in which lives were wrecked; but
from them she herself was as surely protected by her husband's love as,
in her warm and well-stored house, she was shielded from hunger and the
storm. She accepted this good fortune meekly and as a special
blessedness; but she couldn't help rejoicing all the more in the
knowledge of her security.

The knowledge of her security gave luxury to the sigh with which she
turned in the course of a few minutes to write her note. The desk stood
under the mirror between the two windows at the end of the small back
drawing-room. The small back drawing-room projected as an ell from the
larger one that crossed the front of the house. She had just reached the
words, "shall have great pleasure in accepting your kind invitation
to--" when she heard her husband's step on the stairs. He was coming up
from his solitary breakfast. She could hear, too, the rustle of the
newspaper in his hand as he ascended, softly and tunelessly whistling.
The sound of that whistling, which generally accompanied his presence
in the house, was more entrancing to her than the trill of nightingales.

The loneliness her fancy ascribed to the girl over by the Park
emphasized her sense of possession. She raised her head and looked into
the mirror. The miracle of it struck her afresh, that the great, strong
man she saw entering the room, with his brown velvet house-jacket and
broad shoulders and splendid head, should be hers. She herself was a
little woman, of soft curves and dimpling smiles and no particular
beauty; and he had stooped, in his strength and tenderness, to make her
bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh, as she had become. And he had
become bone of _her_ bone and flesh of _her_ flesh. She was no more his
than he was hers. That was the great fact. She was no longer content
with the limited formula, "They twain shall be one flesh"; they twain
had become one spirit and one life.

It was while asserting this to herself, not for the first time, that she
saw him start. He started back from the window--the large central
window--to which he had gone, probably with vague thoughts of the
weather, like herself. It was the manner of his start that chiefly
attracted her attention. After drawing back he peered forward. It was
an absurd thing to think of him; she knew that--of him of all
people!--but one would almost have said that, in his own house, he
shrank from being seen. But there was the fact. There was his
attitude--his tiptoeing--his way of leaning toward the mantelpiece at an
angle from which he could see what was going on in the Park and yet be
protected by the curtain.

Then it came to her, with a flush that made her tingle all over, that
she was spying on him. He thought her in the children's room up-stairs,
when all the while she was watching him in a mirror. Never in her life
had she known such a rush of shame. Bending her head, she scribbled
blindly, "dinner on Tuesday evening the twenty-fourth at--" She was
compelled by an inner force she didn't understand to glance up at the
mirror again, but, to her relief, he had gone.

Later she heard him at the telephone. To avoid all appearance of
listening she went to the kitchen to give her orders for the day. On her
return he was in the hall, dressed for going out. Scanning his face, she
thought he looked suddenly care-worn.

"I've ordered a motor to take me downtown," he explained, as he pulled
on his gloves. He generally took the street-car in Madison Avenue.

"Aren't you well?" she thought it permissible to ask.

"Oh yes; I'm all right."

"Then why--?"

He made an effort to be casual: "Well, I just thought I would."

She had decided not to question him--it was a matter of honor or pride
with her, she was not sure which--but while giving him the note to post
she ventured to say, "You're not worried about anything, are you?"

"Not in the least." He seemed to smother the words by stooping to kiss
her good-by.

She followed him to the door. "You'd tell me, wouldn't you, if you were
worried?"

For the second time he stooped and kissed her, again smothering the
words, "Yes, dear; but I'm not."

She stood staring at the glass door after he had closed it behind him.
"Oh, what is it?" she questioned. Within less than an hour the world had
become peopled with fears, and all she could do was to stare at the
door through which she could still see him dimly.

She could see him dimly, but plainly, for the curtain of patterned
filet-work hanging flat against the glass was almost transparent from
within the house, though impenetrable from outside. Was it her
imagination that saw him look cautiously round before leaving the
protection of the doorway? Was it her imagination that watched while he
crossed the pavement hurriedly, to spring into the automobile before he
could be observed? Was it only the needless alarm of a foolish woman
that thought him anxious to reach the shelter of the motor lest he
should be approached or accosted? She tried to think so. It was easier
to question her own sanity than to doubt him. She would not doubt him.
She assured herself of that as she returned to her post in the oriel
window.

The girl in gray was gone, and down the long street, over which there
was a thin glaze of ice, the motor was creeping carefully. She watched
it because he was inside. It was all she should see of him till
nightfall. The whole of the long day must be passed with this strange
new something in her heart--this something that wasn't anything. If he
would only come back for a minute and put his arms about her and let her
look up into his face she would _know_ it wasn't anything. She did know
it; she said so again and again. But if he would only discover that he
had forgotten something--a handkerchief or his cigar-case; that did
happen occasionally....

And then it was as if her prayer was to be answered while still on her
lips. Before the vehicle had got so far away as to be indistinguishable
from other vehicles she saw it stop. It stopped and turned. She held her
breath. Slowly, very slowly, it began to creep up the gentle slope
again. She supposed it must be the treacherous ground that made it move
at such a snail's pace. It moved as if the chauffeur or his client were
looking for some one. Gradually it drew up at the curb. It was the curb
toward the Park--and from another of the little openings with iron posts
to space them off appeared the girl in gray.

She advanced promptly, as if she had been called. At the door of the car
she stood for a few minutes in conversation with the occupant. For one
of the parties at least that method of communication was apparently not
satisfactory, for he stepped out, dismissed the cab, and accompanied the
girl through the little opening into the Park. In a second or two they
were out of sight, down one of the sloping pathways.

       *       *       *       *       *

During the next two months Edith had no explanation of this mystery, nor
did she seek one. After the first days of amazement and questioning she
fell back on what she took to be her paramount duty--to trust. She
argued that if he had seen her in some analogous situation, however
astounding, he would have trusted her to the uttermost; and she must do
the same by him. There were ever so many reasons, she said to herself,
that would not only account for the incident, but do him credit. The
girl might be a stenographer dismissed from his office, asking to be
reinstated; she might be a poor relation making an appeal; she might be
a wretched woman toward whom he was acting on behalf of a friend. Such
cases, and similar cases, arose frequently.

The wonder was, however, that he never spoke of it. There was that side
to it, too. It induced another order of reflection. He was so much in
the habit of relating to her, partly for her amusement, partly for his
own, all the happenings, both trivial and important, of each day, that
his silence with regard to this one, which surely must be considered
strange--strange, if no more--was noticeable. A wretched woman toward
whom he was acting on behalf of a friend! It surely couldn't, _couldn't_
be a wretched woman toward whom he was acting, not on behalf of a
friend, but....

That it might be all over and done with would make no difference. Of
course it was all over and done with--if it was that. No man could love
a woman as he had loved his wife during the past six or seven years, and
still--But it _wasn't_ that. It never _had_ been that. _If_ it had
been--even before they were married, even before he knew her--But she
would choke that thought back. She would choke everything back that told
against him. She developed the will to trust. She developed a trust that
acted on her doubts like a narcotic--not solving them, but dulling their
poignancy into stupor.

So March went out, and April passed, and May came in, with leaves on
the trees and tulips in the Park, and children playing on the bits of
greensward. She had walked as far as the Zoo with the two little boys,
and, having left them with their French governess, was on her way home.
People were in the habit of dropping in between four and six, and of
late she had become somewhat dependent on their company. They kept her
from thinking. Their scraps of gossip provided her, when she talked to
her husband, with topics that steered her away from dangerous ground. He
himself had given her a hint that a certain ground was dangerous; and,
though he had done it laughingly, she had grown so sensitive as to see
in his words more perhaps than they meant. She had asked him a question
on some subject--she had forgotten what--quite remote from the mystery
of the girl in gray. Leaning across the table, with amusement on his
lips and in his eyes, he had replied:

"Don't you remember the warning?

    'Where the apple reddens
         Never pry,
    Lest we lose our Edens,
         Eve and I.'"

Inwardly she had staggered from the words as if he had struck her,
though he had no reason to suspect that. In response she merely said,
pensively: "_En sommes nous lá?_"

"_En sommes nous_--where?"

"Where the apple reddens."

"Oh, but everybody's there."

"You mean all married people."

"Married and single."

"But married people _more_ than single."

"I mean that we all have our illusions, and we'd better keep them as
long as possible. When we don't--"

"We lose our Edens."

"Exactly."

"So that our Edens are no more than a sort of fool's paradise."

"Ah, no; a sort of wise man's paradise, in which he keeps all he's been
able to rescue from a wicked world."

She was afraid to go on. She might learn that she and their children and
their home and their happiness had been what _he_ had been able to
rescue from a wicked world--and that wouldn't have appeased her. Her
thoughts would have been of the wicked world from which he had escaped
more than of the paradise in which he had found shelter. She was no holy
Elisabeth, to welcome Tannhäuser back from the Venusberg. That he should
have been in the Venusberg at all could be only a degree less torturing
to her than to know he was there still.

So she kept away from subjects that would have told her more than she
feared already, taking refuge in themes she had once considered vapid
and inane. To miss nothing, she hurried homeward on that May afternoon,
so as to be beside her tea-table in the drawing-room before any one
appeared. And yet, the minute came when she cast aside all solicitudes
and hesitations.

Going up the pathway leading to the opening opposite her house, she
noticed a figure standing between the two iron posts. It was not now a
figure in gray, but one in white--in white, with a rose-colored sash,
and carrying a rose-colored parasol. Edith quickened her pace
unconsciously, urged on by fear lest the girl should move away before
she had time to reach her. In spite of a rush of incoherent emotions she
was able to reflect that she was perfectly cool, entirely
self-possessed. She was merely dominated by a need--the need of coming
face to face with this person and seeing who she was. She had no idea
what she herself would do or say, or whether or not she would do or say
anything. That was secondary; it would take care of itself. The
immediate impulse was too imperative to resist. She must at least _see_,
even if nothing came of her doing so. If she had any thought of a
resulting consequence it was in the assumption that her presence as wife
and woman of the world would dispel the noxious thing she had been
striving to combat for the past two months, as the sun dissipates a
miasma.

But her approaches were careful and courteous. She, too, carried a
parasol, negligently, gracefully, over the shoulder. It served to
conceal her face till she had passed the stranger by a pace or two and
glanced casually backward. She might have done so, however, with full
deliberation, for the woman took no notice of her at all. Her misty,
troubled blue eyes, of which the lids were red as if from weeping, were
fixed on the house across the way.

Edith saw now that, notwithstanding a certain youthfulness of dress and
bearing, this was a woman, not a girl. She was thirty-five at least,
though the face was of the blond, wistful, Scandinavian type that fades
from pallor to pallor without being perceptibly stamped by time. It was
pallor like that of the white rose after it has passed the perfection of
its bloom and before it has begun to wither.

Edith paused, still without drawing the misty eyes on herself.

"Do you know the people in that house?" she asked, at last.

The woman looked at her, not inquiringly or with much show of
comprehension, but vaguely and as from a distance. Edith repeated the
question.

The thin, rather bloodless lips parted. The answer seemed to come under
compulsion from a stronger will: "I--I know--"

"You know the gentleman."

The pale thin lips parted again. After a second or two there was a
barely audible "Yes."

"I'm his wife."

There was no sign on the woman's part either of surprise or of quickened
interest.

There was only the brief hesitation that preceded all her responses.

"Are you?"

"You knew he was married, didn't you?"

"Oh yes."

"Have you known him long?"

"Eleven years."

"That's longer than I've known him."

"Oh yes."

"Do you know how long I've known him?"

"Oh yes."

"How do you know?"

"I remember."

"What makes you remember?"

"He told me."

"Why did he tell you?"

A glow of animation came into the dazed face. "That's what I don't know.
I didn't care--much. He always said he would marry some day. It had
nothing to do with me. We agreed on that from the first."

"From the first of--what?"

"From the first of everything."

Before putting the next question Edith took time to think. Because she
was so startlingly cool and clear she was aware of feeling like one who
stands with the revolver at her breast or the draught of cyanide in her
hand, knowing that within a few seconds it may be too late to
reconsider. And yet, she had never in her life felt more perfectly
collected. She looked up the street and down the street, and across at
her own house, of which the cheerful windows reflected the May sunshine.
She bowed and smiled to a man on foot. She bowed and smiled two or three
times to people passing in carriages. From the Park she could hear the
shrieks of children on a merry-go-round; she could follow a catchy
refrain from "The Belle of New York" as played by a band at a distance.
Her sang-froid was extraordinary. It was while making the observation to
herself that her question came out, before she had decided whether or
not to utter it. She had no remorse for that, however, since she knew
she couldn't have kept herself from asking it in the end. As well expect
the man staggering to the outer edge of a precipice not to reel over.

"So it was--everything?"

In uttering the words she felt oddly shy. She looked down at the
pavement, then, with a flutter of the eyelids, up at the woman.

But the woman herself showed no such hesitation.

"Oh yes."

"And is--still?"

And then the woman who was not a girl, but who was curiously like a
child, suddenly took fright. Tears came to her eyes; there was a
convulsive movement of the face. Edith could see she was a person who
wept easily.

"I won't tell you any more."

The declaration was made in a tone of childish fretfulness.

Edith grew soothing. "I'm sorry if I've hurt your feelings. Don't mind
speaking, because it doesn't make any difference to me--now."

The woman stared, the tears wet on her cheeks. "Don't you--love him?"

Edith was ready with her answer. It came firmly: "No."

"Didn't you--_ever_?"

This time Edith considered, answering more slowly. "I don't know. If I
ever did--the thing is so dead--that I don't understand how it could
ever have been alive."

The woman dried her eyes. "I don't see how you can help it."

"_You_ can't help it, can you?" Edith smiled, with a sense of her own
superiority. "I suppose that's the reason you come here. I've seen you
before."

"Have you?"

"Yes; several times. And that _is_ the reason, isn't it?--because you
can't help loving him."

The woman's tears began to flow again. "It's because I don't know what
else to do. When he doesn't come any more--"

"Oh, so he doesn't come."

"Not unless I make him. When he sees me here--"

"Well, what then?"

"He gets angry. He comes to tell me that if I do it again--"

"I see. But he _comes_. It brings him. That's the main thing, isn't it?
Well, now that you've told me so much, I'll--I'll try to--to send him."
She was struck with a new thought. "If you were to come in now--you
could--you could wait for him."

The frightened look returned. "Oh, but he'd kill me!"

"Oh no, he wouldn't." She smiled again, with a sense of her
superiority. "He wouldn't kill you when he knew I didn't care."

"But _don't_ you care?"

She shook her head. "No. And I shall never care again. He can do what he
likes. He's free--and so are you. I'd rather he went to you. Eleven
years, did you say? Why, he was your husband long before he was mine."

"Oh no; he was never my husband. We agreed from the first--"

"He wasn't your husband according to the strict letter of the contract;
but I don't care anything about that. It's what _I_ call being your
husband. I'd rather you took him back.... Oh, my God! There he is."

He was standing on the other side of the street watching them. How long
he had been there neither of them knew. Engrossed in the subject between
them, and screened by their sunshades, they hadn't noticed him come
round the corner from Madison Avenue on his way home. He stood leaning
on his stick, stroking an end of his long mustache pensively. He wore a
gray suit and a soft gray felt hat. For a minute or more there was no
change in his attitude, even when the terrified eyes of the women told
him he was observed. As he began to thread his way among the vehicles to
cross the street he displayed neither haste nor confusion. Edith could
see that, though he was pale and grave, he could, even in this
situation, carry himself with dignity. In its way it was something to be
glad of. She herself stood her ground as a man on a sinking ship waits
for the waves to engulf him.

Reaching the pavement, he ignored his wife to go directly to the woman.

"What does this mean, Maggie?"

His tone was not so much stern as reproachful. The faded woman, who was
still trying to make herself young and pretty, quailed at it.

Edith came to her relief:

"Isn't that something for _you_ to explain, Chip?"

He turned to his wife. "I'm willing to explain anything you like,
Edith--as far as I can."

"I won't ask you how far that is--because I know already everything I
need to know."

"Everything you need to know--what for?"

"For understanding my position, I suppose."

"Your position? Your position is that of my wife."

"Oh no, it isn't. There's your wife."

"Don't say that, Edith. That lady would be the first to tell you--"

"She _has_ been the first to tell me. She's been extremely kind. She's
answered my questions with a frankness--"

"But _you're_ not kind, Edith. Surely you see that--that mentally she's
not--not like every one else."

"Oh, quite. I don't think _I_ am now. I doubt if I ever shall be again.
No woman can be mentally like every one else after she's been deceived
as we've been."

"_She_ hasn't been deceived, Edith; and I should never have deceived you
if--"

She laughed without mirth. "If you hadn't wanted to keep me in the
dark."

"No; if I hadn't had responsibilities--"

"Responsibilities! Do you call _that_"--her glance indicated the woman,
whose misty stare went from the one to the other in a vain effort to
follow what they were saying--"do you call that a responsibility?"

"I'm afraid I do, Edith."

"And what about--me?"

"Hasn't a man more responsibilities than one?"

"A married man hasn't more wives than one."

"A married man has to take his life as his life has formed itself. He
was an unmarried man first."

"Which means, I suppose, that the ties he formed when he was an
unmarried man--"

"May bind him still--if they're of a certain kind."

"And yours _are_--of a certain kind."

"They're of _that_ kind. I haven't been able to free myself from them.
But don't you think we'd better go in? We can hardly talk about such
things out here."

She bowed to another passing friend. He, too, lifted his hat. When the
friend had gone by she glanced hastily toward the house.

"No, I can't go in," she said, hurriedly. "I'd rather talk out here."

"Very well, then. We can take a stroll in the Park?"

"What? We three?"

"Oh, she's gone--if that's the only reason."

Turning, Edith saw the woman with the rose-colored parasol rapidly
descending the path by which she had come.

[Illustration: He turned from the girl to his wife. "I'm willing to
explain anything you like--as far as I can."]

"I'd still rather stay out here," she said. "If I were to go in, I think
it would--"

"Yes? What?"

"I think it would kill me."

"Oh, come, Edith. Let's face the thing calmly. Don't let us become
hysterical."

"_Am_ I hysterical, Chip?"

"In your own way, yes. Where another woman would make a fuss, you're
unnaturally frozen; but it comes to the same thing. I know that your
heart--"

"Is breaking. Oh, I don't deny that. But I'd rather it broke here than
indoors. I don't know why, but I can stand it here, with people going
by; whereas in there--"

"Oh, cut it, Edith, for God's sake! Can't you see that my heart's
breaking, too?"

She looked him in the face, shaking her head sadly. "No, Chip, I can't
see that. If there had been any danger of it you wouldn't have--"

"But I couldn't help it. That's what you don't seem to understand."

"No; I'm afraid I don't."

"Would you _try_ to understand--if I were to tell you?"

"I think I know already most of what you'd have to say. She's a woman
whom you knew long before you knew me--and from whom you've never been
able--"

"She was the daughter of a Swedish Lutheran pastor--dead
now--established in New Jersey. In some way she drifted to the stage.
Her name was Margarethe Kastenskjold. When she went on the stage she
made it Maggie Clare. She had about as much talent for the theater as a
paper doll. When I first knew her she was still getting odd jobs in
third and fourth rate companies. Since then she hasn't played at all."

"I understand. There's been no need of it. She's quite well dressed."

"Let me go on, will you, Edith? I was about two or three and twenty
then. She may have been a year or two older. She was living at that time
with Billy Cummings. And somehow it happened--after Billy died--and she
was stranded--"

She made an appealing gesture. "_Please!_ I know how those things come
about--or I can easily imagine. In your case--I'd--I'd rather not try."
She got the words out somehow without breaking down.

"All the same, Edith," he went on, "you'll _have_ to try--if you're
going to do me anything like justice. If she hadn't been a refined,
educated sort of girl, entirely at sea in her surroundings, and
stranded--stranded for money, mind you, next door to going to
starve--and no chance of getting a job, because she couldn't act a
little bit--if it hadn't been for all that--"

"Oh, I know how you'd be generous!"

"Yes; but you don't know how I came to be a fool."

"Is there any reason why I _should_ know--now that the fact is there?"

He looked at her steadily. "Edith! What are you made of?"

She returned his look. "I think--of stone. Up till to-day I've been a
woman of flesh and blood; but I'm not sure that I am any longer. You
can't kill the heart in a woman's body--and still expect her to _feel_."

"But, Edith--Edith darling--there's no reason why I _should_ have killed
the heart in your body when I never dreamed of doing you a wrong--that
is, an intentional wrong," he corrected.

"You knew you were doing _some_ woman a wrong--some future woman, the
woman you'd marry--as far back as when you took up what Billy Cummings
dropped from his dead hands--"

"Oh, that! That, dear, is nothing but the talk of feminist meetings. Men
are men, and women are women. You can't make one law for them both.
Besides, it's too big a subject to go into now."

"I'm not trying to. I wasn't thinking of men in general; I was thinking
only of you."

"But, good Lord, Edith, you don't think I've been better than any one
else, do you?"

Her forlorn smile made his heart ache. "I _did_ think so. I dare say it
was a mistake."

"It _was_ a mistake. If you hadn't made it--"

"But it was at least a mistake one can understand. I could hardly be
expected to take it for granted--whatever men may be, or may have the
right to be--that the man who asked me to marry him--and who made me
love him as I think few men have been loved by women--I could hardly
take it for granted that he was already keeping--and had been keeping
for years--and would keep for years to come--another--"

He moved impatiently. "But, I tell you, I couldn't get rid of her. I
couldn't shake her off--or pay her off--or do any of the usual things.
It was agreed between us before I married you--_long_ before I married
you--that everything was at an end. But, poor soul, she doesn't know
what an agreement is. There's something lacking in her. She's always
been like a child, and of late years she's been more so. If you knew her
as I do you'd be sorry for her."

"Oh, I _am_ sorry for her. Her whole mind is ravaged by suffering."

"I know it's my fault; but it isn't wholly or even chiefly my fault. A
woman like that has no right to suffer. She lost the privilege of
suffering when she became what she is. At any rate, she has no right to
haunt like a shadow the man who's befriended her--"

"But, I presume, she's befriended _him_. And--and continues to befriend
him--since that's the word."

He avoided her eyes, looking up the street and whistling tunelessly
beneath his breath.

"I said--_continues_ to befriend him," she repeated.

The tuneless whistling went on. She allowed him time to get the full
effect of her meaning. As far as she could see her way, her line of
action depended on his response. When he dodged the question she knew
what she would have to do.

"Look here, Edith," he said, at last, "the long and short of it is this.
She's on my hands--and I can't abandon her. I must see that she's
provided for, at the very least. Hang it all, she's--she's attached to
me; has been attached to me for more than ten years. I can't ignore
that; now, can I? And she's helpless. How can I desert her? I can't do
it, any more than I could desert a poor old faithful dog--or a baby. Can
I, now?"

"No; I dare say not."

"But I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll undertake never to see her
again--of my own free will. I'll give you my word of honor--"

She shook her head. "Oh, I'm not asking for that."

"Then what do you ask for? Just tell me, and whatever it is--"

"It's that, since you can't abandon her, you abandon me."

"_What_?"

She repeated the words more firmly.

"_Never_."

"Then I'm afraid it will be for me to abandon you." She gave him a
little nod. "Good-by."

She had turned and taken a step or two along the pavement before his
astonishment allowed him to overtake her.

"Edith, for God's sake, what do you mean? You're not crazy, are you?"

"Quite possibly I am; I can't tell yet. Or perhaps I _can_ tell. It's
like this," she went on, after an instant's thinking. "A half-hour ago,
while I was talking to that--that poor creature--before you came up--I
was quite aware of being like a woman with a dose of cyanide of
potassium in her hand, and doubting whether or not to take it. Well, I
took it. I took it and I--died. That is, the Edith who was your
wife--died. What survives of her personality is something else. I don't
know what it is yet--it's too soon to say--but it isn't your wife....
It's--it's something like that."

"Oh, don't!" he groaned. "Don't talk that way. Come in. You can't stay
out here."

She looked over at the house again. He thought she shuddered. "I can't
stay out here; but I don't have to go in--there."

"What do you mean? Where are you going?"

"Just now I'm going to Aunt Emily's."

"Very well. I'll send a carriage for you after dinner--if you stay so
late."

"No; don't do that."

"Do you mean--?"

"I mean that I may stay there for two or three days--perhaps longer.
After that I'll--I'll see."

"You'll see--what?"

"Where to go next."

"Oh, come, Edie, let's talk sense. You know I can't allow that."

She smiled again, with that queer, forlorn smile that seemed to stab
him. "I'm afraid the authority is out of your hands--now."

He let that pass.

"Even so, there are the children. Think of them."

"I _am_ thinking of them--which is why I must hurry away. They'll be
here in a minute; and I--I can't see them yet. I shouldn't be able to
bear it."

"And do you think you'll be able to bear our being separated for two or
three days, when you _know_ I adore you? Why, you'll break down within
an hour."

"That's just it. That's why I must hurry. I shall break down within half
an hour. You don't suppose I can go on like this? I'm almost breaking
down now. I must get to Aunt Emily's before--"

She was interrupted by a cry: "Hello, papa!"

Up the pathway leading from the Zoo a little white-suited man of five
came prancing and screaming, followed by another of three doing the
same. The French governess marched primly and sedately behind them.

"You see?" Edith said, quickly. "I must go. I can't see them
to-night--or speak to them--or kiss them--or hear them say their
prayers--or anything. You wouldn't understand; but--but I couldn't bear
it. You must tell them I've gone to spend a few nights with Aunt Emily,
as I did when she was ill. You must say that to the servants, too. Tell
Jenny she needn't send me anything--yet. I have some things there--that
I left the last time--"

"Oh, you're not going to stay all night," he groaned. "You'll come
back."

"Very well. If I come back--I come back. It will be so much the better
or so much the worse, as the case may be. If I come back, it will be
because I accept the compromise you make between me and--and your
other--"

He broke in hastily. "It's not a compromise--and there's no 'other.' If
you could see how far from vital the whole thing is, from a man's point
of view--"

"Unfortunately, I'm only a woman, and can see it only from a woman's
point of view. So that, if I don't come back, it will be
because--because--the Edith who was your wife is dead beyond
resurrection."

"But she isn't!"

"Perhaps not. We must see. I shall know better when I've--I've been away
from you a little."

"And in the mean time you may be risking your happiness and mine."

She shot him a reproachful glance. "Do _you_ say that?"

"Yes, Edith, I do say it. If I've broken the letter of the contract, you
may be transgressing its spirit. Don't forget that. Take care. What I
did, I did because I couldn't help it. You _can_ help it--"

"Oh no, I can't. That's where you haven't understood me. You say I don't
see things from your point of view, and perhaps I don't. But neither do
you see them from mine. You wonder why I don't go over there"--she
nodded toward the house--"where I had my home--where my children have
theirs--where you and I ... But I can't. That's all I can say. I may do
it some day; I don't know. But just now--I couldn't drag myself up the
steps. It would mean that we were going on as before, when all
that--that sort of thing--seems to me so--so utterly over."

"You'll feel differently when you've had time to think."

"Perhaps I shall. And time to think is all I'm asking. You understand
that, don't you? that I'm not making anything definite--yet. If I can
ever come back to you, I will. But if I can't--"

"Hello, mama! Hello, papa!" The elder boy galloped up. "We've seen the
monkeys. And one great big monkey looked like--"

"Allô, maman! Allô, papa! N's avons vu les singes--mais des drôles!
Il y en avait un qui--"

The children caught their father round the knees. Stooping, he put his
arms about them, urging them toward their mother. They were to plead for
him--to be his advocates.

"Tell mama," he whispered to the older boy, "not to go to Aunt Emily's
to-night. Tell her we can't do without her--that we want her at home."
He turned to the younger. "Dis à maman que tu vas pleurer si elle te
quitte ce soir--qu'il faut qu'elle vienne t'écouler dire la prière."

But, when he raised himself, Edith was already walking swiftly up the
Avenue. He would have followed her, only that the children seemed to
restrain him, clinging to his knees. All he could do was to watch
her--watch her while the thronging crowds and the shimmering sun-shot
dust of the golden afternoon blotted her from his sight--and the great
city-world out of which he had received her took her back.




II

RESENTMENT


It was a strange sensation to be free. It was still more strange that it
was not a sensation. It was a kind of numbness. She could only feel that
she didn't feel. In spite of her repeated silent assertions, "I'm free!
I'm free!" any consciousness of change eluded her.

It was true that there had been a moment like a descent into hell, from
which she thought she must come up another woman. Aunt Emily and the
lawyer had whirled her somewhere in a motor. Veiled as heavily as was
consistent with articulation, she had told a tale that seemed
abominable, though it was no more than a narrative of the facts. It
added to her sense of degradation to learn that one of the cheaper
dailies had published a snapshot of her taken as she was re-entering the
motor to come away. But even the horror of that moment passed, as
something too unreal to be other than a dream, and, except that she and
the children were staying with Aunt Emily instead of in their own home,
all was as before. All was as before to a disappointing degree--to a
degree that maddened her.

It maddened her because it brought no appeasement to that which for more
than a year had been her dominating motive--to do something to Chip that
would bring home to him a realizing sense of what he had done to her. It
was not that she wanted revenge. She was positive as to that. She wanted
only to make him understand. Hitherto he hadn't understood. She had seen
that in all his letters, right up to the moment when, driven to despair
by what seemed to her his moral obtuseness, she had implored him not to
write again. It was to help him to understand that which he was either
unable or unwilling to understand that she had so resolutely refused to
see him--partly that, and partly Aunt Emily. She would have died if it
hadn't been for Aunt Emily--died or given in; and the mere thought of
giving in frightened her.

It frightened her chiefly because she possessed the capacity to do it.
In a way it would be easier to do it than not--easier to do it, and yet
impossible to go on with the new situation thus created after it was
done. It would mean being back in the old home and resuming the old
life; there would be what people called a reconciliation. Chip would be
coming and going and whistling tunelessly all over the house. And the
awful thing about it would be that he had it in him to be as happy as if
this horrible thing had never taken place--happier, doubtless, because
it would be behind him. He would not have understood; she would have
ceased trying to make him understand; he would have so little seen the
significance of his own acts as to feel free to do the same thing all
over again.

So the impulse to go back frightened her with a fear that paralyzed her
longing. If he had said but once: "Edith, I know I've sinned against
you; I know I've made you suffer; I've broken the contract between us;
I'm repentant; forgive me," it might have been different. But he had
said nothing of the kind. His letters, beseeching though they were, only
aggravated her complaint against him. "What else could I do?... The poor
thing clung to me.... As far as it affected my devotion to you it might
have happened in another phase of creation." That was the amazing part
of it, that he should expect her to be content with such an explanation,
that he should try to deprive her of a wife's last poor pitiful
privilege, a sense of indignity. She was not only to condone what he had
done, but as nearly as possible she was to give it her approval.

As to this aspect of the case she might not have been so clear if it
hadn't been for Aunt Emily. Aunt Emily was very clear. She was clear and
just, without being wholly unsympathetic toward Chip. That is, she
pointed out the fact that Chip did no more than most men would do. He
was no worse than the average. He might even be a little better. But,
according to Aunt Emily, the man didn't live who was worthy of a really
good woman's love. It was foolish for a really good woman to put herself
at the disadvantage of casting her pearls before--well, Aunt Emily was
too much of a lady to say what; it was all the more foolish considering
the quantity of feminine tag-rag and bobtail quite good enough to be
wives.

Edith couldn't deny that her aunt had kept herself on an enviably high
plane of safety. She had her money to herself, and no heartaches. She
was respected, admired, and feared. By a little circle of adorers,
mostly composed of spinsters younger, poorer, and less advantageously
placed than herself, she was even loved. She was far from lonely; she
was far from having missed the best things in life. She was traveled,
well-read, philanthropic, and broad-minded. She was likewise tall,
stately, and dominant, with an early Victorian face to which a
mid-Victorian wig, kept in place by a band of plaits around the brow,
was not unbecoming. Nevertheless, Aunt Emily was entirely modern, modern
with that up-to-date femininity which with regard to men takes its key
from the bee's impulse toward the drone, stinging him to death once he
has fulfilled his functions.

It was a help to Edith that Aunt Emily could enter into the sufferings
entailed by an outraged love without being hampered by the weaknesses
inherent in the love itself. She could afford to be detached and
impartial bringing to bear on the situation the interest every
intelligent person takes in drama. For her participation Edith felt she
couldn't be too grateful to a relative on whom she had no urgent claim
beyond the fact that she was now her only one. Aunt Emily's clear vision
might, indeed, be said to have found the way through a tangle of
poignant conditions in which her own poor heart had been able to do
nothing but fumble helplessly.

It was a way of sorrows, and there had been no choice but to take it.
Chip had to be made to _feel_. Her whole being had become concentrated
on that result. From it she had expected not only realization for him,
but assuagement of longing for herself; and the latter hadn't come. She
could hardly see that anything had come at all. If it were not for Aunt
Emily she wouldn't have perceived that she had won a victory. Chip might
realize now; she didn't know; she probably would never know; it was
perhaps the impossibility of knowing that left her still unsatisfied. So
long as the thing had not yet been done she had enjoyed at least the
relief of action. She was challenging Chip, she was defying him; he was
making her some sort of response, even when it was made in silence. She
was _the_ one and he was _the_ other, and there was an interplay of
forces between them. Now all that was broken off; all that had come to
an end. She was still _the_ one; but there was no other. Where the other
had been there was a blank, an emptiness. Her heart when it cried out to
him produced the queer, creepy effect of a man talking to himself--there
was no one to hear or to answer. There was a needle but no pole; there
was a law of gravitation, but nothing to justify the power of
attraction.

She was dazed, lost, which was the reason why in the following autumn
she went abroad. She didn't know what else to do. Aunt Emily was rich
and kind; but there were limits to hospitality. One had to feel that
there was a world beneath one's feet, and Europe seemed to be there for
that purpose. Besides, it was easy to travel while the children were so
young. The lawyer conveyed to Chip her intention of taking them, and
returned with the father's consent. She was not bound to ask for this,
but she considered it courteous to do so. If while she did it he chose
to take the opportunity to recognize her continued existence by an
inquiry or a word--well, then, she said to herself with a sob, it was
there for him to make use of. But he didn't take it. He maintained the
silence on which he had fallen back ever since her final peremptory
letter requesting him not to write to her--she wondered if she had made
it more peremptory than she had intended!--and so she sailed away
without so much as a gift from him to the children. She could hardly
bear to look at the shore of the continent that held him as it faded out
of sight, so bitterly she resented what she now called his callousness.

When the cold weather came she established herself at Cap d'Ail, where
the lofty perch of the hotel above Monaco and the Mediterranean seemed
to lift her into a region of friendly, flowery peace. She enjoyed this
as much as she could enjoy anything. No echo of the past reached her
here, and it was an unexpected relief to be away from Aunt Emily's
bursts of triumph and felicitation. With a book she hardly looked at in
her hand she could sit at her window or on the terrace, soothed
incomprehensibly by the blue-green sweep of the immemorial sea beside
which so many other sad hearts had watched before her own. She felt
herself caught into a fellowship that included not only Hagar and
Hecuba, but myriads of unremembered women whose tears alone might have
filled this vast inland ocean--drawing a comfort that was not wholly
morbid from the reflection that there was an end even to the breaking of
hearts.

Here in this high, sequestered spot, which nevertheless preserved the
_mondanités_ to which she was accustomed, she would gladly have spent
the winter alone with her children and their governess had there not
arrived at the hotel a woman she had known for many years and who was in
a position oddly similar to her own. At school she had been Gertie
Cottle. In New York she was Mrs. Harry Scadding. She was now Mrs. G.
Cottle Scadding for purposes of exact identification. She also had
"freed herself"; she also had had a snapshot in the cheaper dailies; she
also traveled with two children. It was impossible for Edith not to meet
her and engage in amicable conversations, during which the lady talked
freely of her "case," discussing the merits and demerits of her "co-,"
as though that person had been a kind of partner.

She was a lively young woman, frank and amusing. Moreover, she knew the
people who made up Edith's small world, and Edith was lonely. While the
two sets of children played together the two mothers sat on the terrace
and talked. It was talk in which Edith was chiefly a listener, but a
listener who couldn't deny that she was entertained. She was
uncomfortable only when discerning compatriots appeared, and with
visible nods and smiles rated them as "two of a kind." It was a kind
over which she and Chip had smiled and nodded many a time during their
wanderings in Europe, never thinking that she herself should ever be
classed in the number.

She had been able to take the situation lightly then--this curious
situation of the "freed" American wife, with or without children,
drifting through Europe, aimless, and generally better off when
friendless. But she began to be sorry for the type. Instead of shrinking
from Gertie in the presence of the discerning compatriots, as she was at
first inclined to do, she made it a point to be seen with her,
championing the sisterhood of loneliness. There were moments when this
association might not have been discreet; but they were also moments in
which--so it seemed to Edith--discretion was not a part of valor. Once
or twice she accompanied her friend to Nice; once or twice to Monte
Carlo. On each of these occasions she found herself in a gathering of
cosmopolitan odds and ends in which she was not at ease; but
championship being new to her, she felt obliged to take its bitter with
its sweet. That it was mostly bitter gave her additional ground of
complaint against Chip. He had driven her to a kind of deterioration, a
deterioration she couldn't define, but of which, as of something noxious
in the atmosphere, she was conscious during every moment spent in her
friend's society.

She grew fanciful with regard to the other Americans in the hotel. She
imagined they slighted her, or disapproved of her, or watched her course
with misgiving. With a family of good, simple people, who apparently had
nothing to strive for with the restlessness which characterized the
social fag-ends whom she was now in the habit of meeting, she would have
been glad to establish relations; but she never got beyond an occasional
bow or smile, generally over some incident connected with the children.
Of one man she was afraid. She was afraid of him without knowing why,
except that he seemed to watch her rather pityingly. She resented the
pity; she resented his watching her at all. And yet....

If he hadn't been a grave man, evidently occupied with grave affairs,
her resentment might have become annoyance. In the circumstances it was
resentment modified by a little gratitude. She hardly understood her
gratitude unless it was for a hint of solicitude in a world where no one
seemed to bother about her any more. He did bother about her. She grew
sure of that. Not for an instant could she think of the quiet, rather
wistful, regard with which she caught him following her or the children
as being meant otherwise than kindly.

She had no idea who he was. All she could affirm from distant and
somewhat superficial observation was that he was Somebody--Somebody of
position, experience, and judgment--Somebody to respect. She thought,
too, that he must be Somebody of distinction, partly because he looked
it, and partly because he was served by a valet and a secretary
scarcely less distinguished than himself. All three were serious men
well into the forties. The valet was English, the secretary French, the
master American. She would not, however, have taken the last-named for a
fellow-countryman if she had not accidentally heard him speak. In regard
to externals he was as nearly as possible denationalized. He had
evidently lived a long time abroad, though he bore no one country's
special stamp. He roused her curiosity, even while the kind of interest
in herself which she attributed to him--with what she admitted were the
most shadowy of reasons--hurt her pride. It hurt it in a manner to make
her the more resolute in going her own way.

Not that it was a really reprehensible way. The worst that could be said
of it was that it brought her into contacts and promiscuities from which
she should have been kept free. Even so no great harm had been done,
especially in the case of a woman with her knowledge of the world. None
had been so much as threatened until the arrival on the scene of a young
Frenchman, a friend of Mrs. Scadding's. Edith then found it necessary to
submit to an introduction with daily, almost hourly, hazards of
encounter.

He was a young Frenchman like many hundreds of his kind, who might have
been a finished sketch in sepia. Sepia would have done justice to the
even tan of his complexion, to the soft-brown of his eyes, of his hair,
of his mustache, and rendered the rich chestnut which was oftener than
not his choice for clothes. Gertie flirted with him outrageously--there
was no other phrase for it. It was the kind of flirting one was obliged
to consider innocent, since the alternative would have been too
appalling. Edith opted for the innocent construction, lending an abashed
countenance to the situation out of loyalty to the sisterhood of
loneliness. It was a countenance that grew more abashed whenever, in the
process of lending it, her eye met that of the man who had constituted
himself, she was convinced, her silent guardian.

Fortunately, Mrs. G. Cottle Scadding took herself off to Italy, the
young Frenchman disappearing at the same time. It was a new proof to
Edith of the depth of need to which she had come down that she missed
them. She missed their frivolity and inconsequentiality because they
were the only interests she had. She was thrown back, therefore, on her
own desolation and on her memories of Chip.

She made the discovery with some alarm that Chip was becoming to her
more and more the center of a group of memories. She was losing him.
That is, she was losing him as an actuality; she was losing him as the
pivot round which her life had swung, even since her knowledge of his
great treason. She was no more appalled by the loss than by the
perception of her own volatility.

It was a perception that deepened when, some fortnight after Gertie's
departure, the young Frenchman reappeared. "He's come back on my
account," was Edith's instant reflection. She was indignant; and yet
something else stirred in her that was not indignation, and to which she
was afraid to give a name. Perhaps there was no name to give it. As far
as she could analyze its elements, they lay in the twin facts that she
was still young enough to be attractive to men and to find pleasure in
her attractiveness. It was a pleasure that raised its head timidly,
apologetically; but it raised it none the less.

It was a new and terrifying thought that Chip might not always be the
only man in her life. She had dedicated herself to him so entirely that
it was difficult to accept the idea that any part of her might have been
held in reserve for future possibilities. That her life should have been
blasted was bad enough; but that it should renew its vigor and put forth
shoots for a second bloom was frightful. Yet there was the fact that
such things happened. Women in her position even married again. _She_
might marry again. She never would--of course! But remarriage was among
the potentialities of the new conditions she had achieved. The full
comprehension of this liberty filled her with dismay.

Up to the present the knowledge that she possessed it had been theoretic
only. The young Frenchman brought home to her the fact that she could
act on it if she were ever so inclined. Not that he asked her to do so.
He had only reached the point of inviting her to dine with him at Monte
Carlo and look in at the gaming afterward. She declined this invitation
gently and without rancor toward him; but, in the idiom she used in
talking with him, it gave her to think.

It gave her to realize also. The moment was rich in revelations
concerning herself. She discovered she was a woman whom a relatively
strange man might invite to dine with him alone. She had passed out of
the fellowship of Hagar and Hecuba to enter that of Mrs. G. Cottle
Scadding. This had happened, she hardly knew how. She discovered,
moreover, that now that it had happened, she was scarcely shocked.
Somehow it seemed in the nature of things--these curious new things she
had created for herself--that she should be invited in this way to
Ciro's and that there might be similar incidents to follow. She
certainly was not shocked. Deep down in her heart something--was it
something feminine? or was it something broadly human?--was secretly
shamefully flattered. She couldn't blame the young fellow. She couldn't
blame Gertie--very much. She might blame herself for being drawn into
Gertie's company, and yet what other course could she have taken? She
had known Gertie since they were school-girls. When all was said and
done Gertie was as good as she--in whatever met the eye. One divorced
woman could hardly draw her skirts away from another. The longer she
reflected the more clearly she saw that she couldn't have done anything
but what she had done without becoming in her own eyes a hypocrite or a
prude, and so she had laid herself open to hearing those words, spoken
ever so respectfully, with a sympathy no American could have approached:

"Madame is so lonely. Madame is too much by herself. Wouldn't it
_distraire_ Madame to dine to-night, let us say, at Ciro's, or the Hotel
de Paris, and look in at the Casino afterward? Madame is always so sad."

The man was too insignificant for her wrath, but not so insignificant
that he couldn't be a warning. He was a warning that even if he failed
to touch her heart it was by no means certain that another man might not
succeed; and not long afterward a man did.

That was Sir Noel Ordway. She had met him almost at once after moving to
Cannes. She moved to Cannes practically on the advice of the
distinguished stranger who continued to follow her with eyes of
brooding concern. That is, what he said amounted to advice. It was, in a
measure, to show him that she appreciated an interest in which there was
an element that touched her profoundly that she accepted it.

She met him suddenly at one of the many turnings in the long flight of
steps that descend from the hotel at Cap d'Ail to the station, and what
there is in the way of town. She had never come abruptly face to face
with him before. She knew she colored and betrayed a ridiculous
self-consciousness. He, on his part, was unruffled and sedate, lifting
his hat with the somewhat rigid dignity that characterized all his
movements.

"Mrs. Chipman Walker, I think."

She acknowledged the words by a slight inclination. He mentioned his own
name, which she knew already.

"I've just been seeing some friends of yours," he went on, calmly, "at
Cannes. I've been lunching with the Misses Partridge."

"Oh, they're there?" It was to say something, no matter what, to cover
up her absurd confusion that she added, "They're friends of my aunt's."

"I, too, have the pleasure of knowing Miss Winfield, which will perhaps
excuse my self-introduction." She answered this by another slight
inclination, while he continued: "The Misses Partridge asked me to say
that they would be glad to see you, if you could ever make it convenient
to go over. They wished me to add that they'd come to see you, but that,
unfortunately, neither is quite well enough. You'd find them at the
Villa Victoire, on the Route de Fréjus."

She was murmuring something to the effect that she would go at once,
when he said in a tone that struck her as significant:

"It's very pleasant at Cannes--more so than here."

She didn't resent this, perhaps because her need was too great. Besides,
there was something about him--it might have been the tenderness of a
man who himself knew what suffering was--that put him outside the region
of resentments. She only said: "Indeed? Why?"

"You'll see that when you go. For one thing, it's further removed from
the atmosphere that comes up to us from--down there." He pointed toward
Monte Carlo. "In that way it's--healthier."

She knew that as she thanked him and passed on she smiled, and that she
did so from lightness of heart. Certainly her heart was less heavy. It
was less heavy because of his kindness, because of this indication that
some one cared what became of her. She felt so forsaken that almost
anybody's kindness would have had the same effect, almost anybody's care
for her welfare; and so she came to respond to the appeal of Noel
Ordway.

He sat beside her the first Sunday she lunched at the Villa Victoire.
The Misses Partridge "knew every one." Of few people in either
hemisphere could the expression be used with no more exaggeration.
Possessing little in the way of means, less in that of accomplishments,
and nothing at all in the line of looks, they had formed a vast circle
of acquaintance, chiefly by a hearty, unaffected interest in each
individual personality. No one, however unimportant, was ever forgotten
by them. Miss Rosamond, who looked like a coachman, spent her time in
correspondence, rounding up absent friends; Miss Gladys, who was thin
and angular, coursed whatever neighborhood they happened to be in,
getting the nice people to come and see them. For reasons not always
clear to the superficial the nice people came and sent others. No two
ladies ever received so many letters of introduction, or wrote them.
Their Sunday luncheons at Cannes were as famous as their Sunday dinners
in New York.

In New York Edith had fought shy of them, mainly because Chip didn't do
them justice. He spoke of them flippantly as "those two old flyaways,"
and would never go to their house. For this reason she herself went
rarely, though when she did she got a perception of broad social
inclusiveness which Chip could hardly appreciate. It was the only house
she knew of in which there were no "sets," and where one met the most
interesting people of all walks in life. She often wondered hew the
Misses Partridge, with their slight resources, physical and material,
accomplished it, envying them somewhat their success. She wondered less,
and envied them less, after she had seen them at Cannes.

Miss Rosamond's deep bass voice, the perfect expression of her red face
and man-like way of dressing, were the first influence in winning her.
"My dear, there's the very hotel for you close beside us, where we could
see you all the time. We stay there ourselves when we're opening and
closing the villa. Big garden for the children--runs right down to the
sea--and nothing but nice people of your own kind."

Edith couldn't help the suspicion that the distinguished stranger at Cap
d'Ail had inspired Miss Partridge's solicitude, but neither did she
resent this. Miss Gladys accompanied her to the hotel in question, to
bring her personal powers to bear on the proprietor, and to help in the
selection of rooms, so that next day Edith was able to move over. In
this way it happened that on the following Sunday she found herself
seated beside Sir Noel Ordway.

The luncheon party was again a collection of cosmopolitan odds and
ends--but with a difference. There was a foreign royalty with his
morganatic wife, the American wife of an English peer, two or three
notable Russians, a French painter of international fame, together with
some half-dozen English and Americans of no importance, among whom
Edith classed herself and the young Englishman beside her.

Between him and her the friendship ripened rapidly and unexpectedly. It
was so unexpectedly that it took her off her guard. It was beyond all
the possibilities her imagination could foresee that he should fall in
love with her--a woman who had had her tragic experience, of no great
beauty, the mother of two children. It was, in fact, through the
children that he made his approaches, in as far as he made them
intentionally. She judged that he didn't do that, that he was caught
unawares, like herself. He had merely expressed a "liking for kids," and
offered to take the youngsters for an outing in his motor-car on the
following day. The kids were to go with their governess; but when he
drove up to the door, and Edith had come out to see them off, it seemed
ridiculous that she shouldn't accompany them. Besides, the governess was
young and pretty, necessitating an elderly person for purposes of
propriety. It was partly, too, in thoughtlessness that Edith yielded to
his persuasion and, putting on a thick coat, jumped in with the rest.

He acted as his own chauffeur, and they drove up the new road through
the Esterels. Edith sat beside him, and as they talked little she was
able to observe him to better effect than on the previous day. She took
him to be a year or two younger than herself, tall and slight, with a
stoop he had probably acquired at Eton. She had understood from Miss
Partridge that he was delicate; and he looked it. The circumstance had
kept him from entering the army or going into diplomacy, sending him to
the Riviera for his winters. He was blue-eyed and blond, with a ragged
mustache too thin to conceal the rather pathetic line of the mouth. A
long, thin nose, with an upper lip so short that the flash of teeth was
visible even when the mouth was in repose, gave him the appearance of an
extremely aristocratic rodent.

The drive was repeated a day or two later, and longer excursions came
after that--to St. Raphael, to Valescure, and as far away as Mentone and
the Gorges du Loup. Edith couldn't help liking the young man, first for
his kindness to the children, and then for himself. For himself she
liked him because he was so simple, straightforward, and sincere.

He grew confidential as time went on, telling her of his home, his
mother, his sisters, his duties as squire and lord of the manor, and the
bore it was to be kept out of a profession and away from England at the
very moment of the hunting. He formed the habit of dropping in so
frequently to tea with her, in the little sun-pavilion of the hotel,
that she fancied the Misses Partridge, who were friends of Lady
Ordway's, began to look uneasy. She wondered if they had given the young
man all the information concerning her that was his due.

She made up her mind to ask. Once the fact was recognized it would be a
safeguard, in that any possibilities of their being other than friends
would be out of the way. He gave her the opportunity one afternoon in
March by asking where she thought of going after she left Cannes. The
children and the governess had had tea with them, but had strolled into
the garden. Other occupants of the sun-pavilion had also wandered out
among the pansy-beds and the blossoming mimosas. Edith took her time
before answering.

"I don't know," she said at last. "It's so hard for me to make plans.
You see, there's nothing to hinder me from going to Sweden,
Switzerland, or Spain; and when that's the case you're indifferent about
going anywhere." She waited a few seconds before saying, "You know about
me, don't you?"

"Rather," he said, promptly. "I've known that all along."

The reply was so downright that she was sorry she had raised the
subject. He seemed to imply that as far as he was concerned the
peculiarities in her situation were of no importance. As she was obliged
to say something, she could only express a measure of relief.

"I'm glad of that. I hoped Miss Partridge would tell you."

He startled her by saying, with the bluntness that was curiously, but
characteristically, at variance with the hesitations of his general
manner:

"You could get married again, couldn't you?"

"Oh no." She blushed helplessly.

"Oh, but you could."

She struggled to keep to the ground of mere discussion. "I could
legally; but I never should."

"Why?"

"Oh, for a lot of reasons I can't talk about."

"Then what did you do it for?"

She managed a smile, even if it was a forced and feeble one. She
understood what he meant by "it."

"I don't have to explain that, do I?"

"No, I suppose not." She hoped he was going to drop the subject, when he
lifted his head to look at her with his rather pathetic blue eyes, "Oh,
but I say, you're not serious in thinking you wouldn't, are you?"

"Perfectly serious. I should never look on the matter as admitting
discussion."

"Oh, but it does, you know."

"Not for me."

"Well, it might not for you, and yet might for--for other people."

She still forced an unsteady smile. "That's something I don't have to
worry about, at any rate. I've given up thinking of other people's
opinions."

"I don't mean other people in general--only in particular."

"I don't know any other people--in particular."

"Yes, you do. You know me."

"I only know you--like that." She snapped her fingers so as to give him
an idea of the entirely transitory nature of their acquaintance.

"That isn't the way I know you."

"Oh, you don't know me at all. You couldn't. You're too young. I belong
to another generation in point of time, and to ages ago in the matter of
experience."

"How old _are_ you?"

She told him.

"You're eighteen months older than I; but that's nothing. My mother was
four _years_ older than my father--nearer five. That sort of thing often
runs in families."

She sprang up. "There's Chippie tramping all over that flower--bed. How
_can_ Miss Chesley?"

The negligence of Miss Chesley enabled her to make her escape, and when
he rejoined her in the garden he accepted the diversion her ingenuity
had found. In a short time he took his leave with no more display of
emotion than on previous occasions.

But he left her troubled and shaken. He left her with the feeling that
the foundations of life, as she was leading it, were insecure. Where
she had thought she was strong and determined she began to see she was
weak and irresolute. She began to see herself as a woman with such an
instinctive need of protection that sooner or later she would accept
it--from some one. If from any one, why not from this man? She liked
him; she was sure of his goodness and kindness. He was already fond of
the children, and the children of him. Moreover, she could be a mother
to him, and he needed mothering, as any one could see. It might not be a
romantic marriage, but it could easily be an ideal one, as far as
anything ideal still lay within the range of her possibilities. It could
be ideal in the sense of a sincere affection both on his side and hers,
and a common life for perhaps higher aims than she had lived with Chip.

It would doubtless be the final stage to the process of making Chip
understand. She wouldn't marry--she couldn't--without some inner
reference to him, without a vital reference to him. If she did marry he
would know at last to what he had forced her. He would have forced her
to looking to another man for what she should have had from him--and
then he would be repentant. Surely he would be repentant then! If he
wasn't he would never be. All her efforts would have become in vain. She
would feel that for any good she had accomplished she might as well have
stayed with him. That thought choked her with its implication of agony
escaped--and bliss forfeited.

But it was looking too far ahead. Everything was looking too far ahead.
Noel Ordway had not asked her to marry him--and might never do so. She
might have scared him off. She hoped she had. That would be simpler. She
was not so inexperienced as to be without the knowledge that marriage
with him would raise as many difficulties as it would settle--perhaps
more. The day came when she had to point that out to him.

But it did not come at once. Nearly a week passed without his return.
For Edith it was a week of some disappointment, and a good deal of
relief. If she wasn't the happier for his absence, she was more at ease.
She could be at ease till the time came for moving on in one direction
or another, when she would be oppressed anew with the sense of her
helplessness. It became clearer to her that if she married at all it
would be to be taken care of.

The question was put formally before her at a moment when she was least
expecting it. It was an afternoon late in March when she was struggling
along the Boulevard du Midi, in the teeth of a warm west wind. On her
left children played in the sands or threw sticks or bruised flowers
into the huge breakers to see them rolled shoreward. On her right the
palms in the villa gardens bowed their heads eastward, while the mimosas
tossed their yellow branches wildly. Before her the Esterels formed a
jagged line of indigo flecked with red, above which masses of stormy
orange cloud broke along the edges into pink. It was still far from the
hour of sunset, though the glamour of sunset was gathering in the air.

She heard his step behind her scarcely an instant before he spoke.

"Oh, I say, Mrs. Walker, I want you to marry me."

The statement was so startling that in spite of all her preparatory
discussion with herself, she turned on him tragically. "For God's sake,
why?"

"Well, because I'm awfully fond of you, you know."

His expression touched her. There was no mistaking the kindliness in his
eyes, or the look of rather wan beseeching in his thin, pinched face. In
his golfing suit of Harris tweed he was not an unattractive figure, even
if he wasn't handsome.

Again her words had little relation to the things she had thought of
beforehand. Her heart was so much with him that she spoke with an
emotion she had never shown to him before.

"Even if you are, don't you see, dear friend, that you can't marry me?"

"Oh, but I can, you know."

She looked about her for a refuge where they could talk, finding it in a
rough shelter designed for the protection of nurses watching children
playing on the sands. It was empty for the moment, except for a tiny,
bare-legged girl of three or four crooning over a big doll. Edith led
the way. "Come over here." They sat down on a bench hacked with initials
and cleanly dirty with sand. The little girl at the other end of the
bench rolled her big eyes toward them with indifference, continuing to
croon to her doll:

"Dors, mon enfant; dors, dors; ta mère est allée au bal.... Dors, mon
enfant, dors; ta mère est au théâtre.... Tais-toi; tais-toi; ta mère
dîne au restaurant.... Dors, ma chérie, dors."

Edith plunged into her subject as soon as they were seated and turned
toward each other. "Tell me. If you married a divorced woman, wouldn't
your whole position in England be--be different?"

"I shouldn't care anything about that."

"That's not what I'm asking you. I'm asking you if there wouldn't be
ways in which it would be hard for you?"

The honesty in his eyes pierced her like a pain. "I shouldn't be
thinking about that, you know. I should be thinking about you."

"Well, then, aren't there ways in which it would be hard for me?"

"Not any harder than it is now. It's pretty hard, isn't it?"

The tears sprang into her eyes, but she knew she must control herself.
"Yes; but it's in the way of the ills I know. The ills I know not of
might be worse."

"Oh, well, they wouldn't be that, you know."

"What about your people?" She sprang the question on him suddenly.

"They'd be all right--in time."

The qualification was like a stab. She spoke proudly. "I'm afraid I
couldn't wait for that."

"You wouldn't have to wait for anything. They'd jolly well have to put
up with what I decided to do. I've got all the say, you know. I'm the
head of the family."

"Yes, _you_ might look at it in that way; but you can easily see what it
would be to me to enter a family where I wasn't wanted."

"That's a bit strong," he corrected. "They'd want you right enough, once
they knew you. It would only be the--the fact of--the--"

She helped him out. "The divorce."

He nodded and finished. "That they'd jib at. Even then--"

"Oh, please don't think I'm blaming them. I should do exactly the same,
in their case."

"They're really not half bad, you know," he tried to explain. "Mother's
an awfully decent sort, and so is Di. Aggie's a bit cattish. But then
she'll soon be married. Fellow named Jenkins, in the Guards. And then,"
he added, irrelevantly, "you're an American."

"Which is another disadvantage."

"No," he said, with emphasis. "The other way round when it comes to
a--a--" He stumbled at the word, but faced it eventually: "When it comes
to a divorce, you know."

She looked at him mistily. "No, I don't know. Aren't a divorced
Englishwoman and a divorced American in very much the same position?"

He hastened to reassure her. "Oh, Lord, no. Not in England they wouldn't
be. A divorced Englishwoman--well, she's in rather a hole, you know;
whereas a divorced American woman--that's natural."

"I see," she responded, slowly. "It's not considered quite so bad."

"Oh, not half so bad. One expects an American woman to be divorced--or
something."

She couldn't be annoyed with him because he was so honest and ingenuous.
She merely said, "So they'd think me the rule rather than the
exception."

"They'd just think you were American, and let it go at that. Besides,"
he continued, earnestly, "when a woman's only been married in
America--"

"She's been hardly married at all. Is that what they'd think in
England?"

"Well, if they'd ever seen the chap around--But when they haven't, you
know--"

"They can't believe in him."

"Oh, I don't say that. But--well, they wouldn't think anything about
him."

She shifted her ground slightly. "But you'd think about him, wouldn't
you?"

"Me? Why should _I_?"

"Because I'd married him before I'd married you--for one thing."

"Oh, but I shouldn't go into that, you know. That would be over and done
with."

"Would it?"

"Well, wouldn't it?"

She mused silently, while the little girl with the bare legs continued
to croon to her doll with a kind of chant:

"Dors, mon enfant, dors.... Ta mère ne reviendra plus ce soir.... Elle
dîne avec le beau monsieur que tu as vu.... Elle te dira bonne nuit
demain.... Dors; sois sage--et dors"

"Even if it were over and done with," Edith said at last, "the fact
would remain--supposing I married you--that your wife had had a life in
which you possessed no share--a very living life, I assure you--and that
her memories of that life were perhaps the most vital thing about her."

"Oh, but I say!" he protested. "That's the very reason I'm so fond of
you. I can see all that already. I shouldn't interfere with it, you
know. It's what makes the difference between you and other women. It's
like the difference between--" He sought for a simile. "It's like the
difference between a book that's been written and printed, and has
something in it, and a silly blank book."

Her eyes filled with tears. "I wonder if you have the least idea of what
you're saying?"

He sought for a more effective figure of speech. "If you were walking
about your place, and found something wounded, you'd want to take it
home and tend it, wouldn't you, till you'd put it to rights again? And
the more you tended it the fonder of it you'd be. But you wouldn't stop
to ask whether a boy had thrown a stone at it or whether it had been
attacked by its mate. You'd let all that alone--and just tend it."

Her tears were coursing freely now beneath her veil. "Is that really the
way you feel about me?"

He grew apologetic. "Oh, I don't mean any Good Samaritan business, don't
you know? If I could look after you a bit you'd do the same by me. I'm
thinking of that, too. Look here," he pursued, confidentially, but
coloring; "I'll tell you something, if you won't think me an ass. I
could have married two or three girls--oh, more than that!--if I'd
wanted to. But I could see what they were after. It wasn't me--not by a
long shot. It was the place--Foljambe--it's really quite a decent place,
you know--right in the shires--and the hunting. They'd have thought it
awful luck to have to clear out of England every year, just when the
hunting begins--and stick in this bally hole--or go to Egypt. But you
wouldn't." As she said nothing for the minute, he insisted, "Would you,
now?"

She shook her head musingly. "No, I shouldn't."

He looked relieved. "Well, that's just it. That's just what I thought."
He colored more deeply, with a hectic spot in each cheek. "Life isn't
all beer and skittles to me, don't you know--and you'd be the kind of
thing I haven't got, don't you know?" He leaned toward her beseechingly.
"Do you see now?"

"I think I do. You mean that we'd mutually take care of each other."

"Well, that's what it would amount to--not to say any more about my
being so awfully fond of you. You won't forget that."

She smiled through her tears. "Oh no; I'm not likely to forget it. I
wish I could tell you--"

But she broke off because she could say no more, struggling to her feet.
He agreed to her request that she should have time to think his proposal
over, and also that he should let her return alone to the hotel,
remaining in the shelter with the crooning child long after she had gone
away.

But once she was out in the wind again she found it difficult to give
the matter concentrated thought. Much as she had been moved while he
talked to her, the emotion seemed to be blown away by the strong air of
reality. It was like the crying in which she had sometimes indulged
herself at a play, and which left no aftermath of sadness. She could
hardly tell what aftermath had been left by Noel Ordway's words; but as
far as she could judge it had everything in it to touch her and appeal
to her, except the possible. And yet so much that was impossible had
happened to her already, who knew but that the next incredible thing
would be that she should become mistress of Foljambe Park? Why not?
Since the haven was open to her, and Chip had left the poor little craft
of her life to toss in a sea too strong for it, why not creep into any
refuge that would receive her? She would certainly be driven sooner or
later into some such port--then why not into this?

She hurried homeward between the thundering breakers on the one hand and
the tossing palms on the other, her mind in a state of storm. In the
garden, as she passed toward the hotel, she saw Miss Chesley with the
children, but she couldn't stop and speak to them. She hurried. She
wanted the protection of her room, of quiet, of the accessories to
mental peace. Perhaps when she got these she should be able to
think--and decide; so she hurried on.

To avoid the main hall, where people might speak to her, she took the
short cut through the sun-pavilion, which would bring her nearer to the
stairs. But on throwing open the door she stood still on the threshold
with a little soundless gasp. "Oh!"

He came toward her sedately, the glimmer of a smile on the stamped
gravity of his face. "I took the liberty of waiting for you. I couldn't
bring myself to go back to Cap d'Ail without knowing how you were."

As he held her hand he seemed to bend over her with what she had already
described to herself as a brooding concern. She knew she was blushing
foolishly and that her knees were trembling under her; and yet,
curiously enough, the little craft of her life seemed suddenly to find
itself in quiet waters, ranged round by protecting hills. She was
confused and sorry and glad and afraid all in one instant. Nothing but
the habit of the hostess, which was so strong in her, enabled her to
capture a conventional tone and say the obvious thing:

"I'm so glad you waited. Won't you sit down, and let me ring for tea?"




III

REPROACH


Chip had never really noticed her until on that Sunday morning in June
it suddenly struck him that she was trying to get a word with him alone.
He had seen her, of course. She had been at Mountain Brook--which was
the name of Emery Bland's place in New Hampshire--every time he had gone
there; but, her quality being unobtrusive, he had paid her no attention.
Furthermore, both Bland and Mrs. Bland, being emphatic in personality
and talkative, he had been the more easily led to ignore this reticent
girl, whose function was apparently limited to seeing her aunt provided
with a shawl, or her uncle with a cigar, at the right opportunities. If
he thought of her at all, it was as of the living spirit of the
furniture. The tables and chairs became animate in her, and articulate;
but her claim to recognition had never gone beyond the necessity for a
hand-shake or a smile. When he did take her hand--on arriving, or on
coming down-stairs in the morning--he received an impression of
something soft and slim and tender; but the moment of pleasure was
always too fleeting for conscious registration. Similarly, when, from a
polite instinct to include her in the conversation, he smiled vaguely in
her direction, he received a look gentle and beaming and almost
apologetic in return; but it was never more to him than if the dimly
lustrous surfaces of Mrs. Bland's nice Sheraton had suddenly become
responsive. She made no demand; and he offered no more than she asked.

Perhaps the fact that the girl was not really the niece of either Mr. or
Mrs. Bland had something to do with his tendency to treat her as a
negligible quantity. Mrs. Bland had explained the situation to him
during his first visit to Mountain Brook.

"Lily isn't our niece at all," she had said, in a tone which seemed to
reproach Lily with an inadvertance. "She's no relation to us whatever.
We don't know who she is. She doesn't even know herself. Since you
insist," she continued, as though Chip had been pressing for
information, "we got her out of an orphanage, the year we built this
house. Mr. Bland seemed to think the house ought to have something young
in it; and so--"

"You might have had a dog," Chip said, dryly.

"You needn't laugh. It wasn't _my_ desire to adopt a child. I simply
yielded to Mr. Bland, as I do in everything. The only stipulation I made
was that she should call us uncle and aunt. I couldn't bear to be called
mother by a child who wasn't my own; but Mr. Bland is so odd that he
wouldn't have cared. I dare say you've noticed how odd he is."

Chip could see that Bland might be odd from his wife's point of view. He
was the self-made man who had shed the traces of self-making. Mrs. Bland
was fond of describing herself as a self-made woman; but the stages of
the process by which she had "turned herself out" were visible. She
would have been disappointed had it not been so. Having confessed from
youth upward that her ambition was "to make the most of herself," there
had never, in her case, been any question of the _ars celare artem_. She
belonged to a number of women's clubs of which the avowed object was
"self-improvement," and attended such classes on "current events" as
would keep her posted on the problems of the day without the bore of
reading the papers. As a self-made woman she also looked the part,
dressing for breakfast as she would like to be found in the afternoon,
with but slight variation for dinner. In her full panoply of plum or
dove color she suggested one of those knights eternally in armor who
decorate baronial halls. Chip considered it probable that Emery Bland
would never have chosen her as the life-long complement to himself had
he not taken that step while he was still an obscure "up-state" country
lawyer, and she the dignified young school-teacher who stood for
"cultivation" in their little town. Cultivation had always been to Mrs.
Bland what hunting is to the rider to hounds--the zest was in the chase.
The zest was in the chase, and the quarry but an excuse for the run.
Over hedges of lectures, and ditches of "talks," and through
turnip-fields of serious, ponderous women like herself, green even in
winter, and after being touched by frost, Mrs. Bland kept on in full
career, with "cultivation" scudding ahead like a fox she never caught a
glimpse of, and which her hounds tracked only by the scent. It was
splendid exercise, and helped her to feel in the movement. If she failed
to notice that her husband had long ago run the fleet animal to earth,
and affixed the mask as an adornment to his home, it was only because
their views of life were different.

No one would now suppose that there had been a time in Emery Bland's
life when it had been his aim also to "cultivate himself," and when he
had actually used the phrase. Between the debonair, experienced New York
lawyer, so much in demand for cases requiring discretion and so capable
of dealing with them--between him and the farmer's boy he had been there
was no more resemblance than between a living word and the dead root out
of which it has been coined. In Emery Bland's case the word was not only
living, but pliant, eloquent, and arresting to ear and eye. He was one
of those men who overlook nothing that can be counted as
self-expression, from their dress to the sound of their syllables.
Superficially genial, but essentially astute, he had made everything
grist that came to his mill, flourishing on it not only in the
financial sense, but also in that of character. It was said that he knew
as many life histories as a doctor or a priest, and generally the more
dramatic ones. The experience had clearly made him cynical, but tolerant
also, and human, with a tendency, as far as he was personally concerned,
to being morally strait-laced. He had seen so much of the picturesque
side of life that he could appreciate the prosaic, which, in Chip's
explanation, was why he could stand by Mrs. Bland. Other people's
surfeits of champagne and ortolans had assured his own taste for plain
roast beef. But he himself ordered the porcelain on which his simple
fare was served, and the wines by which it was accompanied, drunk from
fine old Irish or Bohemian glass.

Chip took this in by degrees. His first acquaintance with a man who was
to exercise some influence on his future was purely professional. He had
gone to him as an offset to Aunt Emily. If the results of this move were
indirect--since Aunt Emily had won the victory--they became apparent in
time. They became apparent when in Chip's bruised heart, where
everything healthy seemed to have been stunned, a slight curiosity began
to awaken concerning his new friend's personality.

He came to consider him a friend by accident--the accident of a club,
where, finding themselves sitting down to dine at the same moment, they
had taken the same table. Primarily, it was an opportunity to adjust
some loose ends of Chip's domestic affairs; incidentally, they stumbled
on a common hobby in Victorian English politics. There was no subject on
which Emery Bland was better informed, with a learning that covered the
whole long stretch from Lord Melbourne to Lord Salisbury, and which he
could garnish with anecdote _ad libitum_. It was a kind of conversation
of which Chip, who had been brought up partly in England, rarely got a
taste in New York, and for which Bland, on his side, didn't often find
an interested listener. Something like an intimacy thus sprang up, but
an intimacy of the kind common among men who have little or no point of
contact out of office hours or away from the neutral ground of the club.
Within these limits the meetings had already been numerous before it
occurred to Chip--more or less idly--that while Bland knew too much of
his sad background, he knew nothing of Bland's. An occasional reference
revealed the lawyer as a married man, but beyond that basic fact their
acquaintance had no more attachment to the main social structure of life
than a floating island of moss and flowers has to the system of
geological strata. It was Bland himself who took the first step in the
direction of closer association.

"Well, how are you getting on?"

He asked the question while slipping into the seat opposite Chip as the
latter lunched at the club, where they met most frequently.

"Oh, so so."

"H'm. So so. _That's_ what you call it."

The tone implied reproach or reproof or expostulation. Chip kept his
eyes on his knife and fork.

"Well, what do _you_ call it?"

"Oh, I'm not obliged to give it a name. I hear other people do that."

"And what do other people say--since you seem to want me to ask the
question?"

"I do. I think you ought to know. They say it's a pity."

Chip took on the defiant air of a bad boy. "They can say it--and go to
blazes."

"They'll say it, all right. Don't you worry about that. But I rather
think that you'll do the going to blazes--at this rate."

Chip raised his haggard eyes. "Well, why not? What is there any better
than blazes for me to go to? Besides, it isn't so awful--when you've got
nothing else."

"Oh, rot, Walker! I'm ashamed of you. I can imagine a man of your type
doing almost anything else but taking to drink."

Chip shrugged his shoulders with the habit acquired in French schools.
"On fait ce que l'on peut. I had three resources left to me--wine,
woman, and song. For song I've no ear; for woman--well, that's all over;
so it came down to Hobson's choice."

"Hobson's choice be blowed! Walker's choice! And you've just time enough
left to cast about for a set of alternatives. Why, I've seen scores of
men in your fix; and of some of them it was the salvation."

"And what was it of the others?"

"Hell. But it was a hell of their own making."

"All right. I'm willing to accept the word. It's a hell of _my_ own
making--but it's hell, just the same."

"But, good Lord! man, even if it is hell, you don't want to wallow in
it."

Chip smiled ruefully. "Oh, I like it. Kind of penance. I like it as
medieval sinners used to like a hair shirt."

"Yes; but the hair shirt was kept out of sight. You're parading your
penance, as you call it, before the world. See here, Walker, why don't
you come up and spend the weekend with me in New Hampshire? My wife
would like to have you. To-day is Friday, and I go up to-morrow morning.
A Sunday in the country would do you good."

Chip refused, but he long remembered why he retracted his refusal. It
was the look of his apartment when he returned to it that night. It was
an apartment in a house at the corner of Madison Avenue and a street in
the Thirties, dedicated to the use of well-to-do bachelors. It had been
a slight mitigation in the collapse of life as he had built it up, that
rooms in so comfortable a refuge should have been free for him. He had
furnished them with some care; and after his first distress had worn
off a little had found a measure of lawless satisfaction in a return to
the old unmarried ways.

But on this particular evening the aspect of the place appalled him from
the minute he turned his latch-key in the lock. Under the stimulus of
Bland's counsels he had come home early, which was in itself a mistake.
It was scarcely nine o'clock. There was an hour or an hour and a half to
pass before he could think of going to bed. Any such interval as that
was always the hardest feature in the day for him. But what smote him
specially now was the air of emptiness and loneliness. It met him as an
odor in the stale smell of the cigar he had smoked on coming up-town
from the office, and which still lingered in the rooms. He had forgotten
to open a window, and the house valet, whose duty it was to "tidy up,"
had evidently gone out.

In the small hall into which Chip entered there was a bookcase with but
two or three odds and ends of books in it, for his habits of reading had
dropped away from him with everything else. In the sitting-room one
brown shoe stood on the hearth-rug before the empty fireplace; the
other on the center-table, a collar and necktie beside it. The soiled
shirt he had thrown off lay on the couch, a sleeve dragging on the
floor. On the mantelpiece, which he had at first consecrated as a shrine
for the photographs of Edith and the children, and flanked by two silver
candlesticks like an altar, there had intruded an open box of perfectos,
an ash-tray that still held the butt-end of a cigar, and an empty
tumbler smelling of whisky. There were traces of cigar ashes
everywhere--on the arms of the easy-chairs, on the rugs, and on the
terra-cotta tiles of the hearth. For the rest the room was a litter of
newspapers, as the bedroom which opened off it was a litter of clothes.

He was not disorderly; he was only careless, and incapable of creating
order for himself. Disorder shocked him profoundly. He always sat down
in the midst of it, helpless, but with a sense of inner misery. And so
he sat down in it now. "My God!" he said to himself, summing up in the
ejaculation all the wretchedness he had wrought, or that had been
wrought, about him.

It was at such minutes that his mind reverted to Edith, with renewed
stupefaction over what she had done. Stupefaction was the word.
Reflection on the subject only left him the more hopelessly bewildered.
If she hadn't loved him her course might have been explicable. As it
was, he found himself driven to a choice between mental aberration on
her part and a witch's spell, inclining to the latter--with the witch in
the guise of Aunt Emily.

Not that he absolved himself. He made no attempt to do that. But he
looked upon his offense as of the kind that naturally calls for mercy
rather than severity. What was the letter of the contract in comparison
with the spirit?--and he had kept the spirit sacredly. Of course he had
done wrong. Who in thunder, he asked, impatiently, ever denied that? But
how many men had not done wrong in the same way? Very few, was his
answer. The answer was the essence of his defense--a defense which,
according to all the laws of human nature and common sense, Edith should
have accepted. That she shouldn't accept it, or couldn't, or wouldn't,
passed his comprehension.

As a rule, he tried not to think of it. He tried not to think of it by
filling up the time with something else. When there had been nothing
else to fill up the time he had stupefied himself with drink. He drank
at first, not because he liked drinking, but because it dulled his
brain, his heart. It didn't excite him; on the contrary, it brought him
to a state of lethargy which, if he was at the club, made him willing to
go home, or, if he was at home, made it possible for him to go to bed
and sleep. It was only within a month or so that he had begun to suspect
that other people noticed it; and even then he hadn't been sure until
Bland had told him so that day.

He had, consequently, come back to his room in the possession of his
faculties, but with a feeling of something unfulfilled that emphasized
his desolation. He perceived then that a habit was beginning to form in
him with a tenacity which it might be difficult to counteract. After
all, would anything be gained by counteracting it? He had known fellows
who drank themselves to death; and except in the last dreadful stages it
hadn't been so bad. They had certainly got their fun out of it, even if
in the end they paid high. He was paying high--and perhaps getting
nothing at all. Wouldn't it be better if he went off this minute
somewhere, and made a night of it?--made a night which would be but the
beginning of a long succession of nights of the same kind? Then when he
was ruined beyond recovery, or in his grave, Edith would know what she
had done to him. He had tried every other way of bringing it home to her
but that. That might succeed where argument had failed. She couldn't
have a mind so much astray as not to be sorry when she saw, or heard of,
the wreck she would have made of him.

It was worth thinking of, and he sat and thought of it. He tried to
conjure up the picture of himself as really besotted--he was not
besotted as yet, even when the worst was said!--degraded, revolting. He
rose to take a cigar, to help his imagination in the task to which he
had set it, but he remembered that the cigar suggested a whisky-and-soda
to go with it, and there was a bottle of Old Piper in the cupboard. He
fell back into his seat again with the longing unsatisfied, but he
continued his dream. It was so pleasant a dream--that is, there were so
many advantages to the course he thought of taking, that he ended by
springing to his feet and saying, almost aloud, "By God, I'll do it."

The resolution being formed, there was a large selection of ways and
means of putting it into execution. He could do this or that. He could
go here or there. It was a bewilderment of choice that saved him. He sat
down again.

No; when it came to the point he wasn't equal to it. It was not the end
he shrank from, but the means--the places to which he would have to go,
the people he would have to consort with. He knew just enough of them to
be sickened in advance. It was with a sense of fleeing to escape that he
hurried to the telephone and called up Emery Bland, asking to be allowed
to accept his invitation.

He arrived at Mountain Brook late on an afternoon in early June, just as
the sun, hovering above the point of its setting, was throwing an almost
horizontal light on the northern and western slopes of Monadnock. The
mountain raised its majestic mass as the last and successful effort of a
tumbling, climbing wilderness of hills. Scattered amid the
upward-sweeping stretches of maple and oak, groves of spruce and pine
had the effect of passing rain-clouds. In the clear air, against the
clear sky, every tree-top on the indented ridges stood out like a little
pinnacle, till with a long, downward curve, both gracious and grandiose,
the mountainside fell to the edge of a gem-like, broken-shored lake. It
was a world extraordinarily green and clean. Its cleanness was even more
amazing than its greenness. The unsullied freshness of a new creation
seemed to lie on it all day long. It was a world which suggested no past
and boded no future. Its transparent air, in which there was not a shred
of atmosphere, its high lights, and long shadows, and restful,
clambering woods, and singing birds, and sweet, strong winds were like
those of some perpetual, paradisical present, with no story to tell, and
none that would ever be enacted. It was a world in which Nature seemed
to hold herself aloof from man, refusing to be tamed by him, rejecting
his caress, keeping herself serene, inviolate, making his presence
incongruous with her sanctity.

It was this incongruity that struck Chip first of all. Not that there
were any of the unapproachable grandeurs of the Alps or the Selkirks,
nor anything that towered or terrified or overawed. All the hilly
woodland was smiling and friendly--but remote. Man might buy a piece of
ground and camp on it; but if he had sensibilities he would remain
conscious of an essence that eluded him, the real thing--withdrawn. He
could be on the spot, but he could never be of it--not any more than he
could give his dwelling the air of springing from the soil.

Chip noticed that, too--the intrusive aspect of any kind of roof that
man could make to cover him, unless it were a wigwam. Emery Bland had
tried to temper this resentment of the landscape to what was not
indigenous to itself by making the lines of his shelter as simple and as
straight as possible. He was from the first apologetic to the Spirit of
the Mountain, as who would say, "Hang it all, you've tempted me here,
but I'll outrage you as little as I can." So he perched his long, white
house, Italian in style if it had style at all, on the top of a knoll
whence he could look far into green depths, with nothing in the way of
excrescence but a tile-paved open-air dining-room at one end, and a
shady spot of similar construction at the other, getting his effects
from proportion. Something in the way of lawn and garden he was obliged
to have, and Mrs. Bland had insisted on a pergola. He fought the pergola
for a year or two, but Mrs. Bland had had her way. A country house
without a pergola, she said, was something she had never heard of. A
_sine quâ non_ was what she called it. So beyond the square of lawn with
its border of flowers the pergola stretched its row of trim white wooden
Doric pillars, while over the latticed roof and through it hung bine and
vine, grape, wistaria, and kadsu. Below the pergola the land broke to a
brook that gurgled through copses of alder, tangles of wild raspberry,
and clumps of blueberry and goldenrod, carrying the waters of the lake
to the Ashuelot, which bore them to the Connecticut, which swept them
southward, till quietly, and almost as unobserved by the human eye as
when they rose in the bosom of the hills, they fell into the sea.

As there was no other guest, Chip was allowed to do as he pleased. What
he pleased was chiefly to sit in the pergola, where the mauve petals of
the wistaria were dropping about him, and fill his gaze with the mystic
peace of the mountain. On Sunday morning the three Blands went to
church, leaving him in sole possession of this green, cool world, with
its quality of interpenetrating purity. He took a volume of some
ambassador's "Recollections" from his host's shelves of Victorian
memoirs; but he never opened it. He also took a cigar, but he didn't
smoke. He only looked--looked without effort, almost without
consciousness--up into the high wonderlands of peace, whence whatever
was brooding there seemed to steal into his soul and cleanse it. It was
this sense of cleansing that he carried back as a sort of possession to
New York--that and the fact imparted by Mrs. Bland during the afternoon,
regarded as unimportant, and yet retained, that Lily Bland was not their
niece.

He returned to Mountain Brook twice during that summer, and in June of
the following year. It was during this last visit that the girl who had
been to him hitherto no more than the living element of the background
gave him the impression that she was seeking an opportunity to speak to
him.

Throughout Saturday it had been an impression almost too faint to be
recorded; but it was significant to him that on Sunday morning she
didn't go to church. She shared the house with him, therefore, a fact of
which he was scarcely aware till he saw her in possession of the
pergola. With a book in her hand she had established herself in a chair
not far from that which by preference he had made his own. The act
roused his curiosity; but when he, too, had taken a book and strolled
out to join her, she didn't keep him in suspense.

She closed her novel as he approached, looking up at him with simple
directness. "I've something to tell you."

Behind the attention he gave to these words he registered the
observation that when you looked at her--which he had rarely done--you
saw she was pretty. Her white skin had a luminosity like that of satin,
and the mouth was sweet with a timid, apologetic tenderness. The glances
one got from her were almost too fleeting to show the color of the eyes,
but he knew they must be blue. Her hair had been striking to him from
the first, chiefly because it was of that hue for which there is no
English word, but which the French call _cendré_--ashen--something
between flaxen and brown, but with no relation to either--that might
have been bleached by a "treatment" only for its unmistakable gleam of
life. It waved naturally over the brows from a central parting, and
massed itself into a great coil behind. She was dressed simply in white
linen, with a belt of "watered" blue silk, and neat, pointed cuffs of
the same material.

Instinctively he knew that what she had to tell him must be important,
for otherwise she would not have come out of the shy depths into which,
like the Spirit of the Mountain, her life seemed to be withdrawn. What
it could be he was unable even to guess at. He smiled, however, and,
taking a casual tone so as not to strike too strong a note at first, he
said, as he sat down, "Have you?"

She continued to speak with the same simple directness. "It's about some
one you used to know."

He grew more grave. "Indeed? I should hardly have supposed that you
could know any one--whom I _used_ to know?"

"I do. I know--You won't mind my speaking right out, will you?"

"Of course not. Say anything you like."

"Well, I know Miss Maggie Clare."

"Great God!" He sank deeper into his wicker arm-chair, throwing one leg
over the other. He seemed to shrink away and to look up at her from
under his brows.

The shy serenity of her bearing was undisturbed. "I've got a message to
you from her."

He was unable to keep the note of resentment out of his voice. "What?"

"She's very ill. I think she's going to die. She thinks so herself. She
wants to know if--if you'd go and see her."

He slipped down deeper into his chair, his chin sunk into his fist. It
was quite like the act of cowering. It was long before he spoke. When he
did so the tone of resentment was more bitter. "Does she realize what
she's done to me?"

"I think she does. In fact, it's the only thing she does realize very
clearly now. She talks of it continually, in her dreamy way--but a way
that's quite heartbreaking. I really think that if you were to see
her--"

He looked up under his lids and brows as she hesitated. "Well?" The
tone was as savage as courtesy would let him make it.

"That you'd forgive her."

His body bounded to an upright attitude, his hands thrust deep into
pockets. "No." If the word had been louder it would have been a shout.
"I shall never forgive her."

There was no change in her sweet reasonableness. "I don't see what you
gain by that."

"I gain this much--that I don't do it."

"I still can't see that it makes your situation any better, while it
makes hers a good deal worse."

"If hers is worse, mine _is_ better. The woman deliberately wrecked my
life after I'd been kind to her--for years."

"The poor thing didn't do it deliberately, Mr. Walker. She did it
because she couldn't help it--because she loved you so."

He shook himself impatiently. "Ah, what kind of love is that?"

The audacity of her response--the curious audacity of shyness--seemed to
him extraordinary only when, later, he thought it over. "I dare say it
isn't a very high kind of love--but there was no question of its being
that--from the first. Was there?"

"All the more reason then why she should have kept where she belonged."

"Yes, of course. And yet it's difficult for love to keep itself where it
belongs when it's very--very consuming."

He leaned back in his chair, eying her. If he spoke roughly it was only
because she had roused all his emotions on his own behalf, as well as a
faint subconscious interest in herself. "Look here, Miss Bland. How much
do you know about this?"

"Oh, I know all about it," she assured him, hurrying to explain, in
answer to something she saw in his face: "Uncle Emery didn't tell me. I
read it first in the papers--you remember there was a lot of talk about
it in the papers--and then every one was talking of it. I couldn't help
knowing. Uncle Emery," she added, "only told me one tiny little thing,
which couldn't do any one any harm."

"And that was--?"

"Miss Clare's address. I asked him for it when I found that I--that I
wanted to go and see her."

"And why on earth should you want to go and see her--a young girl like
you?"

Her blush was like a color from outside reflected in the soft luster of
her skin as a tint of sunset may be caught by the petals of certain
white flowers.

"I had a reason. It wasn't doing any one any harm," she repeated, "not
even you." In further self-defense she added: "Uncle Emery didn't
disapprove, and I've never told Aunt Zena. But I've always been glad I
went--very."

"Why?"

"Because she's a sort of charge of Uncle Emery's, for one thing--since
you've put her in his care. I help _him_ a little bit. And then the
sister she lives with--you knew we'd got her to live with her sister,
didn't you?--isn't very kind to her. It's just the money. And then," she
continued, the soft color deepening, "I had another reason--more
personal--that I'd rather not say anything about."

"I can't imagine anything in the whole bad business that could be
personal to you."

"No, of course you can't. It's only personal by association--by
imagination, probably." She made nothing clearer by adding: "You know
I'm not really Uncle Emery's niece, or Aunt Zena's."

He nodded.

"I don't know who my mother was. But whoever she was--I'm sorry for
her."

He began to get her idea. "You're probably quite wrong," he said,
kindly; "and until you know you're right I shouldn't let fancies of that
sort run away with me."

"Oh, I don't. And yet you can see that when I meet any one like Maggie
Clare--well, I don't feel superior to her. It's like being a
gipsy--George Eliot's Fedalma, for instance--adopted by a kind family,
but knowing she's a gipsy just the same."

He brought his knowledge of the world to bear on her. "I assure you
you're not in the least like that kind of gipsy."

"Neither was Fedalma like her kind; and yet when she could do something
for them she went to them and did it."

"How old are you?" he said, abruptly, asking the same question which but
a few weeks before Noel Ordway had put to Edith, and in much the same
way.

"We call it twenty-three--because we keep my birthday on the date on
which Uncle Emery and Aunt Zena took me; but I must be nearer
twenty-five."

He looked at her more attentively than he had ever done. She was not
really shy; she wasn't even reserved; but she was repressed--repressed
as any one might be who lived under the weight of Mrs. Bland's
protesting, grudging kindliness. It came back to him now, the tone in
which she had said, a year earlier, that she couldn't be called mother
by a child who didn't belong to her. How that must have been "rubbed in"
to the poor girl before him! Other things, too, came back to him,
especially on Bland's part certain stolen moments of tenderness toward
the girl, that had been interrupted in Chip's presence by a peremptory
voice, saying, "Now, Emery, don't spoil the child," or "Lily, dear,
_can't_ you find anything better to do than tease your uncle?" In it all
Chip had found two subjects of wonderment: first, the strange egoism of
this middle-aged woman who could see nothing in the expansion of her
husband's affections but what was stolen from herself; and then, the
extraordinary freak of marital loyalty that could keep a man like Emery
Bland, with his refinement and his knowledge of the world, true to a
woman whom he had once loved, no doubt, in a youthful way, but who was
now his inferior by every token of character. A good enough woman she
was of her kind; but it was no more her husband's kind than it was that
of the gods immortal. What was the secret that kept these unequal
yoke-fellows together, sympathetic, and tolerably happy, when he and
Edith, who were made for each other, had by some force of mutual
expulsion been thrust apart? Bland himself was of the type which, in the
language that was almost more familiar to him than English, Chip would
have called _charmeur_; and yet he deferred to this second-rate woman,
and considered her, and even loved her in a placid, steady-going way,
submitting at times to her dictation. Chip couldn't understand it. If he
himself had been married to Mrs. Bland--But that was unthinkable. What
wasn't unthinkable, and yet became the more bewildering the more he
tried to work the problem out, was that he himself had failed to keep
for his own the woman who suited him in every respect, whose love he
possessed and who possessed his, who was happy with him and he with her,
while Emery Bland had contrived to make the most of the estimable but
rather coarse-grained lady who sat at the head of his table, and have a
truly enviable life with her. No one could be more keenly aware of the
lady's shortcomings, which lay within the realm of taste and
intelligence, than Bland himself. What was his secret? Was it a
principle, or was it nothing but a lucky accident? Was it something in a
cast of character or a tenet of a creed, or was it what any one could
emulate?

These thoughts and questions passed rapidly through Chip's mind, not for
the first time, during the two or three minutes in which there was no
sound about them but the murmur of the brook, the humming of insects,
and the whisper of the summer wind through millions of trees.

He reverted to Maggie Clare, the timbre of his voice again growing
harder. "What's the matter with her?"

She was singularly gentle. "I suppose it could be described most
accurately as a broken heart."

He flushed hotly. "Oh, don't say that," he cried, as if he had been
stung.

"I shouldn't say it if it didn't answer your question."

"_I_ didn't break her heart," he declared, in sharp aggressiveness of
self-defense.

"Oh no. Even she doesn't think so. The poor thing hasn't much mind left,
as you know; but what she has is concentrated on that point--that you
were not to blame in anything. Please don't think that I'm in any way
hinting at such an accusation."

He looked at her stupidly. "Then if her heart's broken, what's broken
it?"

"The circumstances, I suppose. You don't seem to understand that the
poor soul must long ago have reached a point where her love for you was
absolutely the only thing she had."

Again he seemed to shake himself, as though to rid his body of something
that had fastened on it. "I never _asked_ her to love me like that. I
never _wanted_ it."

She smiled, faintly and sweetly. "Oh, well, that wouldn't make any
difference. Love gives itself. It doesn't wait for permission. I should
think you'd have known that."

He leaned forward, an arm resting on one knee. While he reflected he
broke into the tuneless, almost inaudible, whistling Edith used to know
so well. "I said I'd never see her again," he muttered, as the result of
his meditation.

"May I ask if that was a promise to any one, or if it was something you
just said to yourself and about which you'd have a right to change your
mind?"

He continued to mutter. "I said it to--to my wife."

"As a promise? Please forgive me for asking. I shouldn't, only that the
request of a dying woman--"

"I said it," he admitted, unwillingly; "but it wasn't exactly a promise.
My wife said--" He stopped and bit his lip. "She said she didn't care."

"You can't go by that. Of course she did care."

"Then if she cared, I'd let twenty women die, whoever they were--"

She rose with dignity. "That must be for you to decide, Mr. Walker. I've
given you the message I was charged with. It isn't a matter in which I
could venture to urge you."

He, too, rose. "You do urge me," he said in a tone of complaint, "by
thinking that I ought to go."

She looked him timidly, but steadily, in the eyes. "I'm not so sure that
I do. The whole thing is too sacred to your own inner life for me to
have an opinion. You must do what you think right, and Maggie Clare--"

"The woman ruined me," he cried, desperately.

"And must she bear all the responsibility of that?"

The words were accompanied by one of her swift, half-frightened smiles;
but she didn't wait for an answer. Before Chip could begin to stammer
out an explanation that would give his point of view she was passing
rapidly up the pathway, bordered with irises and peonies and
bleeding-hearts, toward the house.

But when he returned to town he went to see Maggie Clare. He went, and
went again. The experience became, in its way, the most poignant in his
life. He had not much knowledge of death and even less of sickness. The
wasted face and the sunken, burning eyes wrought in him a kind of
terror. It was with an effort that he could take the long thin hand,
that already had the chill of the grave in its limp fingers, into his
own. As for kissing those bloodless lips, so eager, so strained, which
he could see was what she wanted him to do, he was unable to bring
himself to it. Luckily he was not obliged to talk, since her mind
couldn't follow coherent sentences. It was enough for her to have him
sit by the bed while she worked her hands gropingly toward him, saying,
"Oh, Chip! oh, Chip!" and murmuring broken things in Swedish. It was
incredible to him that this poor worn thing, this living shadow, that
had exhausted everything but its passion for himself, had once been a
woman whom he loved.

He was glad when she died and could be buried, so that he might consider
that episode as ended--if there was ever an end to anything in this
cursed life! And yet the occurrence brought him another kind of shock.
In the death of one who for years had been so closely associated with
his thoughts it was as if his own death had begun. He grew uneasy,
morbid. Such occupations as he found to fill the hours when he was not
at work grew insufficient. He came to hate the clubs, the restaurants,
the theaters, and such social gatherings as he was now invited to. There
was an evening when from sheer boredom he went home to his rooms as
early as eight o'clock--and the bottle of Old Piper came out of its
hiding-place.

The real struggle followed on that. He had not so far forgotten Emery
Eland's warning as to cease to put up a fight; but he saw now that the
fight would be a hard one. There was again a period in which he weighed
the advantages of "going to the bad" with all sails set against a life
of useless respectability. Going to the bad had the more to recommend it
since he knew that Edith was in New York. His downfall might bring her
back to him, in some such way, from some such motive of saving or pity,
as that by which he himself had been brought to Maggie Clare.

The argument being in favor of Old Piper, Old Piper supported it. Chip
never forgot an evening when, as he staggered down the steps of the club
toward the taxi that had been called for him, he met Emery Bland, who
was coming up. He would have dodged the lawyer without recognition had
it not been for the latter's kindly touch on his arm, while a voice of
distress said: "Ah, poor old chap, what's this?"

He had just wit enough left to stammer: "Edith's in New York. Go and
tell her how you saw me."

With that he staggered on, knowing that he almost fell into the waiting
vehicle.

Worse days ensued--for nearly a week. Worse still might have followed
had they not been cut short suddenly. They were cut short by a note
which bore the signature, Lily Bland. It was a simple note, containing
nothing but the request that he should come and see her on one of a
choice of evenings which she named. He took the first one, which was
that of the day of the note's arrival.

He had hardly seen her since their talk at Mountain Brook in the
previous June. He had not gone again that summer to New Hampshire, and
on the two or three occasions on which he had visited Bland's house in
town she seemed to have retreated once more to her old place as the
spirit of the furniture. He had made efforts to get nearer her, but she
seemed to elude his approaches.

He knew she would not have summoned him without having something grave
to say, and saw that his surmises were correct by her method of
receiving him. She was not in the drawing-room, but in Emery Bland's
library, with a background of bindings of red and blue and green and
gold, a few Brangwyn and Meryon etchings, and one brilliant, sinister
spot of color by Félicien Rops. There was a fire in the monumental
fireplace, and as he entered, a log was just breaking in the middle and
spluttering, across the tall, richly wrought French dog-irons.

It was the room of the successful New-Yorker who delights in giving
himself all the indulgences of taste of which his youth has been
deprived. The girl, dressed simply in some light stuff, and scarcely
_décolletée_, seemed somewhat lost in the spaciousness of her
surroundings. She made no pretense at preliminary social small talk,
going straight to her point. She did this by a repetition of the words
with which she had opened the similar conversation at Mountain Brook.
"I've something to tell you." Having said this while they were shaking
hands, she went on as soon as they were seated in the firelight:

"At least Uncle Emery had something to tell you, and I asked him to let
me do it."

"Why?" He put the question rather blankly.

"Because I thought I could do it better." But she caught herself up at
once. "No; not better. Of course, I can't do that. Only--only I _wanted_
him to let me do it."

Chip's heart bounded. Edith was in New York. She had heard of his
condition. She was coming back to him. He was to have his reward for
taking pity on Maggie Clare. His tongue and lips were parched as he
forced out the words:

"Then it's good news--or you wouldn't want to break it?"

She was not visibly perturbed. Rather, she was pensive, sitting with an
elbow resting on the arm of her chair, the hand raised so as to lay a
forefinger on her cheek. "Don't you think that we often make news good
or bad by our way of taking it?"

"That's asking me a question, when you've got information to give me.
What have you to tell me, Miss Bland?"

"I've something to tell you that will give you a great shock; so that I
don't want to say it till I know you're prepared."

"Oh, prepared! Is one ever prepared? For God's sake, Miss Bland, what is
it? Is one of the children hurt? Is one of them dead?"

"That would be a great grief. I said that this would be a great shock.
There's a difference--and one _can_ be prepared."

"Well, I am. Please don't keep me in suspense. Do tell me."

She sat now with hands folded in her lap, looking at him quietly. "No,
you're not prepared."

"Tell me what to do and I'll do it," he said, nervously, "only don't
torture me."

"One is prepared," she said, tranquilly, "by remembering beforehand
one's own strength--by knowing that there's nothing one can't bear, and
bear nobly."

"All right; all right; I'll do that. Now please go on."

"But _will_ you?"

"Will I what?"

"Will you try to say to yourself: I'm a man, and I'm equal to this. It
can't knock me down; it can't even stagger me. I'll take it in the
highest way. I sha'n't let it degrade me or send me for help to
degrading things--"

He flung his hands outward. "Yes, yes. I know what you're driving at. I
promise. Only, for God's sake, tell me. Is it about--?"

"It's about Mrs. Walker."

"Yes, so I supposed. But what is it? Is she ill? Oh, she isn't dead?"

The cry made her eyes smart, but she kept control of her voice.

"No, she's not dead. She's not even ill. She's perfectly well, so I
understand. But she's been--" The horror in his face, the way in which
he leaned forward as though he would spring at her, warned her that he
knew what was coming. She gave him time to get himself in hand by rising
and taking the two or three paces to the fireplace, where she stood with
a hand on the mantel-board, which was above her head, while she gazed
into the embers. "She's been--married."

She didn't turn round. She knew by all the subtle unnamed senses that he
was huddled in his big arm-chair in a state of collapse. For the minute
there was nothing to say or do. Since the iron had to enter into his
soul, it was better that it should be like this. It was better that it
should be like this--with her there to keep him such company as one
human being can keep for another at such an hour--better than if he were
to learn it in the solitude of his own rooms, or in the unsustaining
frigidity of a lawyer's office. She knew she didn't count for much,
except for the fact--a detail only--that she was _with_ him in every
nerve that helped her to sensation and every faculty she possessed.

So, after the minutes had passed--ten, perhaps, or fifteen--instinct
told her when to speak again. She did it without changing the position
in which she stood, or turning for a glance toward him.

"You won't forget your promise?"

He spoke with the vacant, suffering tone of a sick child, or of a person
so sunk into wretchedness as to find it hard to come up out of it.

"What?"

She repeated the words. "You won't forget your promise?"

His tone was still vacant--vacant and afflicted.

"What promise?"

"That you'd remember you're strong enough to bear it nobly."

"But I'm not."

She turned partly. He was bent over in a crushed, stupid attitude, his
hands hanging limply between his knees. "Oh, Mr. Walker!"

He raised his forlorn eyes. "Why did you want to tell me?"

"Because I wanted to say _that_. I was afraid, if any one else did it,
they'd leave it out."

He gazed at her long with a dull, unintelligent, unseeing expression.
When he spoke he was like a man who tries to get his wits together after
delirium or unconsciousness. "Do you think I am--strong enough?"

"I _know_ you are."

He lumbered to his feet, staggering heavily to the chimney-piece, where
he, too, laid his hands upon the mantel-board, which was just on a level
with his height, bowing his forehead upon them. As he did so she moved
away. Seeing his broad shoulders heave, and fearing she heard something
smothered--was it a groan or a sob?--she slipped out of the room,
closing the door behind her.

But when, some twenty minutes later, he himself came forth, his head
bent, perhaps to hide his red eyes and his convulsed visage, he found
her at the door of the dining-room, with a cup of tea in her hand.
"Drink this," she said, with gentle command.

He declined it with a shake of his head and an impatient wave of the
hand.

"Yes, do," she insisted. "It's nice and hot. I'll have one, too."

Obediently he went into the dining-room. He drank the tea standing and
in silence, in two or three gulps, while she, standing likewise, made a
feint of pouring a cup for herself. He left without a good-night, beyond
a hard, speechless wringing of her hand on his way to the door.

Two things seemed strange to Chip after that evening--the one, that the
fight with Old Piper was ended; and the other, that in the matter of
Edith's marriage, once the immediate shock had spent its strength, he
bowed to the accomplished fact with a docility he himself could not
understand. As for the fight with Old Piper, there was no longer a
reason for waging it. In the new situation Old Piper had lost its
appeal, from sheer inadequacy to meet the new need. The fact of the
marriage he contrived to keep at a distance. He could do this the more
easily because it was so monstrous. It was so monstrous that the mind
refused to take it in, and he made no attempt to force himself. He asked
neither whom she had married nor why she had married, nor anything else
about her. It was a measure of safety. As long as he didn't know he was
able to create a pretended fool's paradise of ignorance which, in his
state of mind, was none the less a fool's paradise for being a pretense.
Even a fool's paradise was a protection. If it hadn't been for the
children, he might not have heard so much as the man's name.

The children called him "papa Lacon." Chip was obliged to swallow that.
They spoke of him simply and spontaneously, taking "papa Lacon" as a
matter of course. They varied the appellation now and then by calling
him "our other papa."

It had been intimated to him, not long after the second marriage, that
he might see the children with reasonable frequency, through the good
offices of Mr. and Mrs. Bland. He soon saw that the arrangements were
really in charge of Lily Bland, who brought the children to her house,
and took them home again. Chip saw them in the library.

The first meeting was embarrassing. Tom was nearly eight, and Chippie on
the way to six. They entered the library together, dressed alike in
blouses and knickerbockers, their caps in their hands. They approached
slowly to where he had taken up a position he tried to make nonchalant,
standing on the hearth-rug with his hands behind him. He felt curiously
culpable before them, like a convict being visited by his friends in
jail. He felt childish, too, as though they were older than, and
superior to, himself. The childishness was shown in his standing on his
guard, determined not to be the first to make the advances. He wouldn't
be even the first to speak.

They came forward slowly, with an air judicial and detached. Tom's eyes
observed him more closely than his brother's, who looked about the room.
Tom, as the elder, seemed to feel the responsibility of the meeting to
be on his shoulders. He came to a halt, on reaching the end of the
library table, Chippie by his side.

"Hello, papa."

"Hello, Tom."

Encouraged by this exchange of greetings, Chippie also spoke up. "Hello,
papa."

"Hello, Chippie."

There followed a few seconds during which the interview threatened to
hang fire there, when the protest in Chip's hot heart--which was
essentially paternal--broke out almost angrily:

"Aren't you going to kiss me?"

It was Tom who pointed out the unreasonableness of emotion in making
this demand. His brows went up in an expression of surprise, which
hinted at protest on his own part. "Well, you're not sitting down."

Of course! It was obviously impossible for two little mites to kiss a
man of that height at that distance. Chip dropped into an arm-chair,
waiting jealously for the two dutiful little pecks that might pass as
spontaneous, and then throwing his big arms about his young ones in a
desperate embrace. After that the ice was broken, and, with the aid of
the games and the picture-books provided by Lily Bland, the meeting
could go forward to a glorious termination in ice-cream. Now and then
there were difficult questions or observations, but they were never
pressed unduly for reply.

"Papa, why don't you live with us any more?"

"Papa, shall we have another papa after this one?"

"Papa, our other papa has a funny nose."

"Papa, are you our real papa, or is papa Lacon?"

In general it was Chippie who put these questions or made the remarks.
Tom seemed to understand already that the situation was delicate, and
had moments of puzzled gravity.

But, taking one thing with another, the occasion passed off well, as did
similar meetings through the rest of that winter and whenever they were
possible--which was not often--in the summer that followed. It was a joy
to Chip when they began again in the autumn, with a promise of
regularity. But that joy, too, was short-lived.

It was his second time of seeing them after the general return to town.
Tom was hanging on his shoulder, while Chippie was seated on his knee.
Chippie was again the spokesman.

"We've got a baby sister at our house."

It seemed to Chip as if all the blood in his body rushed back to his
heart and stayed there. He felt dizzy, sick. The walls of his fool's
paradise were dissolved as mist, revealing a picture he had seen twice
already, each time with an upleaping of the primal and the fatherly in
him; but now ... Edith had been lying in bed, wan, bright-eyed, happy,
with a little fuzzy head just peeping at her breast!

He put the boy from off his knee. Tom seemed to divine something and
stole away. For a second or two both lads watched him--Chippie looking
up straight into his face, Tom gazing from the distant line of the
bookcase, with his habitual expression of troubled perplexity. Chip
managed to speak at last, getting out the words in a fairly natural
tone.

"Look here, boys; I can't stay to-day. I've got a--I've got a pain. Just
play by yourselves till Miss Bland comes for you. Be good boys, now, and
don't touch any of Mr. Bland's things."

He was hurrying to the door when Chippie interrupted him. "Where have
you got a pain, papa?"

He tapped himself on the heart. "Here, Chippie, here; and I hope you may
never have anything so awful."

As he went down the steps he found himself saying: "Will this
crucifixion never end? Have I deserved it? Was the crime so terrible
that I must be tortured by degrees like this?"

He was unable to answer his questions, or even to think. His mind seemed
to go blank till as he tramped down the street he came again to the
consciousness that he was speaking inwardly.

"Damn her! Damn her! She's nothing to me any more."

He was shocked, but he repeated the imprecation. He repeated it because
it shocked him. It struck at what he held to be most sacred. It profaned
his holy of holies, and left it bare to sacrilege. It gave him a fierce,
perverted joy to feel that she whom he would have loved to shield with
everything that was most tender was now exposed to his cursing. It was
rifling his own sanctuary and trampling its treasures in the streets.

He had never had a sanctuary but in her. Other people's temples were to
him not so much objects of contempt as of dim, vague astonishment. Such
words as righteousness and sacrament and Saviour had no place in his
speech. Edith had been the holiest thing he knew. She was both shrine
and goddess. Now that the shrine had been proven empty, and the goddess
irrevocably flown, he got an impious satisfaction from battering down
the altars and blaspheming the deity to whom they had been raised.

"Damn her! Damn her!"

He repeated the curse at intervals till he reached his rooms, the
hateful rooms that he rarely visited at this hour of the day. He was
not, however, thinking of their hatefulness now, as he had come with an
intention.

There was a fire laid in the fireplace, and he lighted it. When it was
crackling sufficiently he drew Edith's photograph from its frame and,
after gazing at it long and bitterly, tossed it into the blaze. He
watched it blister and writhe as though it had been a living thing. The
flame seized on it slowly and unwillingly, biting at the edges in a
curling wreath of blue, and eating its way inward only by degrees. But
it ate its way. It ate its way till the whole lovely person
disappeared--first the hands, and then the bosom, and then the throat
and the features. The sweet eyes still gazed up at him when everything
else was gone.

He had hoped to get relief by this bit of ritual, but none came. When
that which had been the semblance of his wife was no more than a little
swollen rectangle of black ash, and the fire itself was dying down, he
threw himself into a chair.

The reaction was not long in setting in. It set in with a voice that
might have come from without, but which he nevertheless recognized as
his own:

"You fool! Oh, you fool! What difference does this make to your love for
her? You know you love her, and that you will never cease loving her,
and that what you envy her is--the child."

What you envy her is--the child! He pondered on this. It was like an
accusation. The admission of it--when admission came--was the point of
departure in his heart of a new conscious yearning.




IV

DANGER


It was what he had been afraid of on and off for seven years. The wonder
was that it hadn't happened before. But, since it had not happened, he
had got out of the way of expecting it. The fear of it used to dog him
whenever he went to the theater or the opera or out to dine. There had
been minutes in Fifth Avenue, or Bond Street, or the Rue de la Paix, as
the case might be, when, at the sight of a feather or a scarf or
something familiar in a way of walking, his heart and brain seemed to
stop their function. He had known himself to stand stock-still,
searching wildly for the easy, casual phrases he had prepared--for the
purpose of carrying off such a meeting as this, if ever it occurred,
only to find that he was mistaken--that it was some one else.

There had been two or three years like that, two or three years in which
they had often been in the same city, perhaps under the same roof; but
he had never so much as caught a glimpse of her. In the earlier months
that had been a relief. He couldn't have seen her and kept his
self-control. He could follow the routine of life only by a system he
had invented--a system for shutting her out of his thought, that the
sight of her would have wrecked.

Then had come another period in which he felt he could have committed
infamies just to see her getting in or out of a carriage, or lunching in
a restaurant, or buying something in a shop. There were whole seasons
when he knew she was in New York from autumn to spring; and, though he
haunted all the places where women who keep in the movement are likely
to be found, he never saw her.

He knew he could have discovered her plans and followed her; but he
wouldn't do that. Besides, he didn't want to meet her in such a way as
to be obliged to speak to her. He wouldn't have known what to say, or by
what name to call her. Such an encounter would have annoyed her and made
him grotesque. It was more than he asked. He would have been satisfied
with a glimpse of her gloved hand or her veiled face as she drove in
the Park or the Avenue. But he never got it.

After he married, the fear of meeting her came back. It was fear as much
for her sake as for his own. He began to understand that the
embarrassment wouldn't be all on his side, nor the suffering. He picked
that up from the children, as he had picked up so many things, piecing
odds and ends of their speeches together. He saw them so rarely now that
he attached the greater value to the hints they threw out. He never
questioned them about her, but it was natural that they should take a
wider range of comment in proportion as they grew older. So he learned
that her dread of seeing him was as great as his own of seeing her. It
was astonishing that in all those seven years the hazards of New York
should not have thrown them together.

And now, at the moment when he might reasonably have felt safest, there
she was! That is, she was on the steamer. For seven or eight days they
were to be cooped up on the same boat. He could never go on deck or into
the saloon without having to pass her. Worse still, she could never go
outside her cabin door without the risk of being obliged to make him
some sign of recognition. And a sign of recognition between _them_--why,
the thing was absurd! Between them it must be all--or nothing; and it
couldn't be either.

He looked at the passenger-list again. Yes; that was her name: _Mrs.
Theodore Lacon_. It was not a name likely to be duplicated. In all human
probability it was she. As far as he could gather from the list, she was
traveling alone, without so much as the companionship of a maid. He,
too, was alone; but, fortunately, his name was inconspicuous: _Mr. C.
Walker_. It was just the sort of name to be overlooked. She might read
the list half a dozen times without really seeing it. If she were to
notice it, she might easily not reflect that the initial stood for
Chipman. It was conceivable that if she didn't actually see him she
might not know that he was on the ship at all.

The thought suggested a line of action. He was in his cabin at the time.
He could stay there. Looking through the port-hole, he saw that they had
not yet passed the Statue of Liberty. While in dock he had kept to his
room, in order to read letters and avoid the crowd that throngs the deck
of an outgoing steamer. There was every likelihood that she hadn't seen
him any more than he had seen her. If he kept himself hidden she might
never know! He could avoid the decks by day and take his exercise by
night. By night, too, he could creep into the smoking-room and get a
little change. But he would stay away from the general gathering-places
on the ship and spare her what pain he could. That they should meet as
strangers was out of the question. That they should meet as social
acquaintances was even more so. They had been all to each other--and
they had been nothing. No other relation was possible.

So the week passed, and they reached Liverpool. He was purposely among
the last to go ashore. In the great shed where the luggage was
distributed under initial letters, he was glad to remember that W was so
far from L. Nevertheless, he allowed his eye to roam toward section L,
but found no one there whom he recognized. He ran over in his mind the
various chances that she might not have come. It was no uncommon thing
to read in a list of passengers the names of people who hadn't sailed.
He had done so before.

Later he scanned, as discreetly as he could, the occupants of the
special train that was to take them to London. He couldn't see that she
was anywhere among them. He sighed, but whether from relief or
disappointment he was not sure.

As it was one o'clock, he took his seat in the luncheon-car, making sure
in advance that she wasn't there. He had come to the conclusion by this
time that she was not on the train at all--that she hadn't been on the
steamer. He did not, however, regret his precautions, because--well,
because the sense of her proximity had made him feel as he had felt in
the days--fourteen years ago now--when the very streets of the city in
which she lived were hallowed ground. He had supposed that emotion dead.
Probably it was dead. It must be dead. It was merely that, owing to the
constraint of the voyage, his nerves were unstrung, inducing the frame
of mind in which people see ghosts. Yes, that was it; he had been seeing
ghosts. It was not a living thing, this renewed yearning for a sight of
her. It was only the reflex of something past. It could be explained
psychologically. It was the sort of evanescent sentiment inspired by old
songs, or by the scent of faded flowers, reviving old joys tenderly,
perhaps poignantly, but fleetingly, insubstantially, and only as the
wraiths of what they were. Yes, that was it, he repeated to himself as
he lunched. It was nothing to be afraid of, nothing incongruous with the
fact that he had left a wife and child in New York. It was not an
emotion; it was only the echo, the shadow, the memory of an emotion,
gone before it could be seized.

And then, suddenly, they were face to face. He was on his way from the
luncheon-car to the compartment he shared with two or three men at the
other end of the train. She was standing in the corridor, looking out at
the vaporous English landscape. Through the mists overlying the flat
fields and distant parks trees loomed weirdly, the elms and beeches in
full leaf, the oaks just tinged with green. Cottony white clouds drifted
overhead; the sun was dimly visible. Now and then a line of hedge was
white, or pink and white, with the bursting may.

He didn't recognize the lady who barred his way along the narrow
passage. As she stood with one arm on the brass rail that crossed the
window he could see an ungloved hand; but it might have been any hand.
She wore a long brown coat, rather shapeless, reaching to the hem of her
dress, while a large hat, about which a green veil looped and drooped
irregularly, entirely concealing the head, helped to make her, as he
stood waiting for her to move, a mere feminine figure without
personality.

It was the sense that some one desired to pass that caused her to turn
slightly, glancing up at him sidewise. Even so, he couldn't see all of
her face--not much more than the forehead and the eyes. But the eyes
seemed to come alive as he looked down into them, like sapphires under
slowly growing light. When she turned, her movements had the
deliberation of bewilderment. She might have been just wakened in a
place she didn't know.

"Chip!" There was another half-minute of incredulous gazing before she
said anything more. "What are you doing here?"

He felt the necessity of explaining his presence. "I was on the boat. I
didn't know--"

"That I was on it, too?"

"I--I did know that," he stammered, "after we sailed. Not before. It was
the name in the list--"

"But I never saw you. There weren't many passengers. I was always on
deck."

Her distress betrayed itself in the trembling of her voice, in the
shifting of her color, and in the beating of the ungloved hand upon the
gloved one.

He felt his own confusion passing. It was so natural to be with her, so
right. His voice grew steadier as he said:

"I didn't go about very much. I was afraid--"

She nodded, speaking hastily. "I understand. It was kind of you. And
you're--alone?"

He cursed himself for coloring, but he couldn't help it. He had a wife
and child in New York! He saw that she wanted to recognize that fact
from the first. She wanted to put that boy and his mother between them.
Her husband and child stood between them, too. He took that cue in
answering.

"Yes; I've run over hurriedly on business. And are you alone, too?"

She glanced toward the empty compartment where her bags were stowed in
the overhead racks, and her books and illustrated papers lay on the
cushions. "I'm on my way to join my--" It was her turn to color.

He nodded quickly, to show that he understood.

"He's in Biarritz," she hurried on, for the sake of saying something.
"I'm to meet him in Paris. I wasn't coming over at all this spring. I
wanted to stay with the children at Towers--"

It was a safe subject. "How were the children when you left?"

"Tom was all right; but Chippie has been having the same old trouble
with his tonsils. They'll have to be cut again."

"I thought so the last time I saw him. And he's growing too fast for his
strength, poor little chap. I notice," he added, gazing at her more
intently than he had as yet permitted himself to do, "that he begins to
look like you."

She smiled for the first time. "Oh, but _I_ think he looks like _you_."

"No; Tom takes after me. He's a Walker. Chippie's--"

"A darling," she broke in. "But he's not strong. Ever since he had the
scarlet fever--"

"Yes, I know. But it might have been worse. We might have lost him. Do
you remember the night--?"

She put her hand to her eyes as if to shut out the vision of it. "Oh,
that awful night! And you were more afraid than I was. Mothers are
braver than fathers at times like that."

"It was watching the fight he put up. Gad, he was plucky, the poor
little chap! And he was only three, wasn't he?"

"Three and five months."

"And he'll be eleven his next birthday. How the years fly! By the way,
won't it soon be time for Tom to be going to boarding-school?"

They were being pushed and jostled by guards and passengers. Between
sentences it was necessary to make room for some one going or coming.
She was obliged to step back into her compartment. Having taken the seat
in the corner by the window, she motioned with her hand toward that in
the opposite corner by the door. In this way they were separated by the
length and width of the compartment, the distance marking the other
gulf between them.

She continued to talk of the children, looking at first into the
cavernous obscurity of Crewe station, through which they were dashing,
and then at the open country. The children, with their needs, their
ailments, their future careers, could not but be the natural theme
between them. It lasted while they passed Nuneaton, Rugby, and Stafford,
and were well on their way to London. Suddenly he risked a question:

"Do they--understand?"

She was plainly agitated that he should disturb the ashes that buried
their past. Her eyes shot him one piteous, appealing glance, after which
they returned to the passing landscape. "Tom understands," she said, at
last. "Chippie takes it for granted."

"Takes it for granted--how?"

"Just as they both did--till Tom began to get a little more experience.
It seemed to them quite the ordinary thing to have"--she hesitated and
colored--"to have two fathers."

He winced, but risked another question:

"What makes you think that Tom's discovered it to be unusual?"

"Because he's said so."

"In what way? Do you mind telling me?"

"I'd rather _not_ tell you."

"But if I insist?"

"You'll insist at the risk of having your feelings hurt."

"Oh, that!" A shrug of his shoulders and a wry smile expressed his
indifference to such a result. "Did he ask you anything?"

She nodded, without turning from the window.

"Won't you tell me what it was? It would help me in my future dealing
with the boy."

She continued to gaze out at the park-like fields, from which the mists
had risen. "He asked me if you had done anything bad."

"And you told him--?"

"I told him that I didn't understand--that perhaps I'd never
understood."

"Thank you for putting it like that. But you did understand, you
know--perfectly. You mustn't have it on your conscience that--"

"Oh, we can't help the things we've got on our consciences. There's no
way of shuffling away from them."

He allowed some minutes to pass before saying gently: "You're happy?"

She spoke while watching a flock of sheep trotting clumsily up a
hillside from the noise of the train. "And you?"

"Oh, I'm as happy as--well, as I deserve to be. I'm not _un_happy." A
pause gave emphasis to his question when he said, almost repeating her
tone: "And you?"

"I suppose I ought to say the same." A dozen or twenty rooks alighting
on an elm engaged her attention before she added: "I've no _right_ to be
unhappy."

"One can be unhappy without a right."

"Yes; but one forfeits sympathy."

"Do you need sympathy?"

She answered hurriedly: "No, not at all."

"I do."

His words were so low that it was permissible for her not to hear them.
Perhaps she meant at first to make use of this privilege, but when a
minute or more had gone by she said: "What for?"

"Partly for the penalties I've had to pay, but chiefly for deserving
them."

It seemed to him that her profile grew pensive. Though it detached
itself clearly enough against the pane, it was a soft profile, a little
blurred in the outline, with delicate curves of nose and lips and
chin--the profile to go with dimpling smiles and a suffused sweetness.
It pained him to notice that, though the suffused sweetness and the
dimpling smiles were still as he remembered them, they didn't keep out
of her face certain lines that had not been there when he saw her last.

"I think I ought to tell you," she said, after long reflection, "that I
understand that sort of sympathy better now than I did some years ago.
One grows more tolerant, if that's the right word, as one grows older."

"Does that mean that if certain things were to do again--you wouldn't do
them?"

She took on an air of dignity. "That's something I can't talk about."

"But you think about it."

"Even so, I couldn't discuss it--with you."

"But I'm the very one with whom you _could_ discuss it. Between us the
conversation would be what lawyers call privileged."

She looked round at him for the first time since entering the
compartment. "Is anything privileged between you and me?"

"Isn't everything?"

"I don't see how."

"We've been man and wife--"

"That's the very reason. No two people seem to me so far apart as those
who've been man and wife--and aren't so any longer."

"And yet, in a way, no two are so near together."

Her eyes were full of mute questioning. He made no attempt to approach
her, but in leaning across the upholstered arm of his seat he seemed to
overcome some of the distance between them.

"No two are so near together," he went on, "for the very reason that
when they're separated outwardly they're bound the more closely by the
things of the heart and the soul and the spirit. After all, those are
the ties that count. The legal dissolving of bonds and making of new
ones is only superficial. It hasn't put you and me asunder--not the you
and me," he hurried on, as something in her expression and attitude
seemed to indicate dissent, "not the you and me that are really
essential. No court and no judge could dissolve the union we entered
into when you were twenty-one and I was twenty-seven, and our two lives
melted into each other like the flowing together of two streams. Neither
judge nor court can resolve into their original waters the rivers that
have already become one."

She smiled faintly, perhaps bitterly. "Doesn't your figure of speech
carry you too far? In our case the judge and the court were only
incidental. What really dissolved our union was--"

"I know what you're going to say. And it _was_ against the letter of the
contract. Of course. I've never denied that, have I? But in every true
marriage there's something over and above the letter of the contract--to
which the letter of the contract is as nothing. And if ever there was a
true marriage, Edith, ours was."

"Stop!" Her little figure became erect. Her eyes, which up to the
present he had been comparing to forget-me-nots, as he used to do, now
shone like blue-fired winter stars. "Stop, Chip."

"Why?"

"Because I ask you to."

"But why should you ask me to, when I'm only stating facts? It _is_ a
fact, isn't it? that our marriage was a true one in every sense in which
a marriage _can_ be true, till other people--no, let me go on!--till
other people--your Aunt Emily most of all--advised you to exact your
pound of flesh and the strict rigor of the law. I gave you your pound of
flesh, Edith, right off the heart; so that if atonement could be made in
that way--"

"Chip, _will_ you tell me what good there is in bringing this up now?
You're married to some one else, and so am I. We can't go back, because
we've burned the bridges behind us--"

"But it's something to know that we'd go back if we could."

"I haven't said so."

"True."

He fell silent because of the impossibility of speech. He made no move
to go. To sit with her in this way, without speaking, was like an
obliteration of the last seven years, reducing them to a nightmare. It
was a shock to him, therefore, when she pointed to a distant spire on a
hill, saying:

"There's Harrow. We shall be in London in half an hour."

In London in half an hour, and this brief renewal of what never should
have been interrupted would be ended! He recalled similar journeys with
her over this very bit of line, when the arrival in London had been but
the beginning of long delightful days together. And now he might not see
her for another seven years; he might never see her any more. It was
unnatural, incredible, impossible; and yet the facts precluded any
rebellion on his part against them. Even if she were willing to rebel he
couldn't do it--with a wife and boy in New York. He had married again on
purpose to satisfy his longing for a child--a family. He felt very
tenderly toward them, the little chap and his mother; but he was clear
as to the fact that he felt tenderly toward them, pityingly tender,
largely because when face to face with Edith he wished to God that they
had never been part of his life. And doubtless she felt the same toward
her Mr. Lacon and the child of that union. But she would never admit
it--not directly, at any rate. He might gather it from hints, or read
it between the lines; but he could never make her say so. Why should she
say so? What good would it do? Were she to confess to him that she hated
the man toward whom she was traveling, he would experience an unholy
satisfaction--but, after all, it would be unholy.

In the end he could find no simpler relief to his feelings than to take
down her belongings from the overhead racks.

"I'll just run along and pick up my own traps," he explained, "and come
back to see you properly looked after."

Though she assured him of her ability to look after herself, he felt at
liberty to ridicule her pretensions. "You must have changed a great deal
if you can do that," he declared, as he handed down a roll of rugs
strapped with a shawl-strap.

"I have changed a great deal."

"I don't see it. I can't see that you've changed at all--essentially."

"Oh, but it's essentially that I _am_ changed. Superficially I may be
more or less the same--a little older; but within I'm another woman."
She took advantage of the fact that his back was turned to her, as he
disentangled the handles of parasols and umbrellas from the network
above, to say further: "Perhaps--since we've met in this unexpected
way--and talked--possibly a little too frankly--it may be well if I
remind you that you'd still be confronted with that fact--that I'm
another woman--even if our bridges weren't burned behind us." He decided
to let that pass without discussion, and because he said nothing she
added: "And I dare say I should find you another man. So don't let us be
too sorry, Chip, or think that if we hadn't done what we _have_ done--"

Though he still stood with his back to her, lifting down a heavy bag
with a black canvas covering, he could hear a catch in her voice that
almost amounted to a sob. Because there was something in himself
dangerously near responding to this appeal, he uttered the first words
that came to him:

"Hello! Here's a thing I recognize. Didn't you have this--?"

As he stood holding the bag awkwardly before her she inclined her head.

"One of your wedding presents, wasn't it?"

[Illustration: "Oh, Chip, go away! I can't stand any more--_now_."
"Do you mean that you'll see me--later--when we're in London?"]

She found voice to say: "It's my dressing-case. Mama gave it to me."

"And didn't I break a bottle in it once?"

She tried to catch his tone of casual reminiscence. "It's still broken."

"And isn't this the bag that got the awful bang that time we raised a
row about it when we landed in New York? A silver box stove in, or
something of that sort?"

She succeeded in smiling, though she knew the smile was ghastly. "It's
still stove in."

"Gad, think of my remembering that!"

He meant the remark to be easy, if not precisely jocose; but the
trivial, intimate details wrung a cry from her: "Oh, Chip, go away! I
can't stand any more--_now_."

He pressed his advantage, standing over her, the black bag still in his
hands, as she cowered in the corner, pulling down her veil. "'Now'!
'Now'! Do you mean that you'll see me--later--when we're in London?"

The veil hid her face, but she pressed her clasped hands against her
lips as if to keep back all words.

"Do you mean that, Edith?" he insisted.

Her breath came in little sobs. She spoke as if the words forced
themselves out in spite of her efforts to repress them: "I'm--I'm
staying at the Ritz. I shall be there for--for some days--till--till--he
sends for me."

"Good. I'm at the Piccadilly. I shall come to-morrow at eleven."

Before she could withdraw her implied permission he was in the corridor
on the way to his own compartment; but at Euston he was beside her door,
ready to help her down. Amid the noise and bustle of finding her luggage
and having it put on a taxi-cab, there was no opportunity for her to
speak. He took care, besides, that there should be none. She was
actually seated in the vehicle before she was able to say to him, as he
stood at the open window to ask if she had everything she required:

"Oh, Chip, about to-morrow--"

"At eleven," he said, hastily. "I make it eleven because if it's fine we
might run down and have the day at Maidenhead."

She caught at a straw. If she couldn't shelve him, a day in the country,
in the open air, would be less dangerous than one in London. And perhaps
in the end she might shelve him. At any rate, she could temporize.
"I've never been at Maidenhead."

"And lunch at Skindle's isn't at all bad."

"I've never been at Skindle's."

"And after lunch we'll go out on the river--the Clieveden woods, you
know--and all that."

"I've never seen the Clieveden woods."

"Then that's settled. At eleven. All right, driver; go on."

But she stretched her hands toward him. "Oh, Chip, don't come! I'm
afraid. What's the good? Since we've burned our bridges--"

He had just time to say: "Even without bridges, there are wings. At
eleven, then. All right, driver; go on. The Ritz Hotel."




V

PENALTY


He went to Berne because she had let slip the name of that place during
the afternoon at Maidenhead. It was the only hint of the kind she threw
out during the afternoons--four in all--they passed together. He forgot
the connection in which they came, but he retained the words: "He may
have to go to Berne."

_He_ was between them as an awesome presence, never mentioned otherwise
than allusively. His name was too sinister to speak. Each thought of him
unceasingly, in silence, and with anguish; but, as far as possible, they
kept him out of their intercourse. It was enough to know that he was
there, a fearful authority in the background, able to summon her from
this brief renewal of old happiness, as Pluto could recall Eurydice.

It was the supremacy of this power, which they themselves had placed in
his hands, that in the end drove Chip Walker to wondering what he was
like.

"What _is_ he like?" he found the force to ask.

She looked distressed. "He's a good man."

He nerved himself to come to a point at which he had long been aiming:
"Look here, Edith! Why did you marry him?"

"Do you mean, why did I marry him in particular, or why did I marry any
one?"

"I mean both."

"Oh, I don't know. There--there seemed to be reasons."

That was at Tunbridge Wells--in the twilight, on the terrace of the old
Calverly Hotel. They were sitting under a great hawthorn in full bloom.
The air was sweet with the scent of it. It was sweet, too, with the
scent of flowers and of new-mown hay. In a tree at the edge of the
terrace a blackbird was singing to a faint crescent moon. There was
still enough daylight to show the shadows deepening toward Bridge and
over Broadwater Down, while on the sloping crest of Bishop's Down Common
human figures appeared of gigantic size as they towered through the
gloaming.

Edith was pouring the after-dinner coffee. It was the first time they
had dined together. On the other days she had made it a point to be back
in London before nightfall; but she had so far yielded to him now as to
be willing to wait for a later train.

"What sort of reasons?" he urged.

"Oh, I don't know," she said again, pensively, dropping a lump of sugar
into his coffee-cup. She added, while passing the cup to him: "It isn't
so easy for a woman to be--to be drifting about--especially with two
children."

"But why should you have drifted about, when you knew that at a sign
from you--?"

She went on as if he hadn't spoken. "And when I saw you had dismantled
the house and other people were living in it--I couldn't help seeing
that, you know, in driving by--"

"But, good God, Edith, you wouldn't have come back to me?"

She stirred her own coffee slowly. "N-no."

"Does that mean no or yes?"

"Oh, it means no. That is"--she reflected long--"if I _had_ gone back to
you I should have been sorry."

"You would have considered it a weakness--a surrender--"

She nodded. "Something like that."

"And you really had stopped--caring anything about me?"

"It wasn't that so much as--so much as that I couldn't get over my
resentment." She seemed to have found the explanatory word. "That was
it," she continued, with more decision. "That's what I felt:
resentment--a terrible resentment. Whatever compromise I thought of,
that resentment against you for--for doing what you did--blocked the
way. If I'd gone back I should have taken it with me."

"But you don't seem to suffer from it now. Or am I wrong?"

She answered promptly: "No; you're right. That's the strange part of it.
After I married--it left me. It was as if old scores were wiped out.
That isn't precisely what I felt," she hastened to add; "and yet, it was
something _like_ that."

"You'd got even."

She shook her head doubtfully. "N-no. I don't mean that. But the past
seemed to be dissolved--not to exist for me any more."

"H'm! Not to exist for you any more!"

"I said _seemed_. That's what bewildered me--from the beginning: things
I thought I felt--or thought I didn't feel--for a while--only to find
later that it wasn't--wasn't _so_." She went on with difficulty. "For
instance--that day--that day at the Park--I thought that everything was
killed within me. But it wasn't. It came alive again."

"But not so much alive that you wanted to come back to me."

"Alive--in a different way."

"What sort of different way?"

Her eyes became appealing. "Oh, what's the good of talking of it now?"

"Because you haven't told me what I asked--why you married him--why you
married any one."

She turned the query against himself: "Why did _you_?"

"I didn't till after you did. I wouldn't have done it then if--if I
hadn't been so--well, to put it plainly, so damned lonely."

She gave him one of the smiles that stabbed him. "Well, then? Doesn't
that answer your question?"

He thought it did, and for a while they listened to the blackbird's song
in silence. It was their last talk. They parted at the door of the Ritz
with the intention of spending the next day in Windsor Forest--or some
other romantic wood; but within a few minutes she had telephoned him
that the summons had arrived. Next morning she left for Paris.

And so he went to Berne. He hadn't meant to go there when he said
good-by to her at Victoria. He had no intention of following her or
putting himself in her way. He had purposely asked nothing of her plans,
or so much as the date of her return to America. He had not precisely
made up his mind that they were parting for good, but he was too stunned
to forecast the future. He was stunned and sickened. He was stunned and
sickened and disconsolate to a degree beyond anything he had thought
possible in life. If it hadn't been for the bit of business that had
brought him to London he would hardly have had courage enough to get
through the days.

But, the business coming to an end, he was stranded. There was nothing
to do but go back to the wife and child whose existence he never
remembered except with a pang of self-reproach. He meant to go back to
them--but not yet. It was too soon. Edith was too much with him. The
fact that her physical presence was withdrawn made her spiritually the
more pervasive. The afterglow of their days together couldn't fade
otherwise than slowly, like light when the sun goes down.

So, when he should have been going to New York, he went to Berne. It was
not really in the hope of being face to face with her again or of having
speech with her. Even if she came there the dread presence would come
with her and keep them apart. But Berne was a little place, a quiet
place, restful, soothing, a haunt of ancient peace. It had struck him,
on former visits there, that on this spot ignored by the tourist, who
changes trains subterraneously, consecrated to old sturdiness and modern
wisdom, serenely heedless of the blatant and the up-to-date, a bruised
spirit might heal itself in a seclusion cheered by green hills and
distant snowy ranges. It was such solitude that, in the first place, he
sought now. If in addition he could see the shadow of Edith passing
by--no more!--he felt that he would soon be inwardly strong again.

At Berne there is a hotel known chiefly to wise travelers--a hotel of
old wines, old silver, old traditions, handed down from father to son,
and from the son to the son's son. Standing on the edge of the bluff
which the city crowns, it dominates from its windows and terraces the
valley of the Aar. Swift and unruffled, the river glides through the
meadows like a sinuous ice-green serpent. Beyond the river and behind
the pastoral slopes of the Gurten hangs a curtain of mist, which lifts
at times to display the line of the Bernese Oberland, from the
Wetterhorn to the Bettfluh.

It is a hotel with which the learned people who sit in international
conferences and settle difficult questions are familiar. It was
sheltering a conference when Chip Walker arrived. Each of the nations
had appointed three distinguished men to consult with three
distinguished men from each of the other nations on possible
modifications in the rules of the Postal Union when the use of
aeroplanes became general in that service. The distinguished men met
officially in a great room of the Bundespalast; but unofficially they
could be seen strolling along the arcaded medieval streets, or feeding
the civic bears with carrots at the bear-pit, or reading or smoking or
sipping coffee and liqueurs in the fine semicircular hall of the hotel.
They were French, or Austrian, or Russian, or German, or English, or
Danish, or Dutch, as the case might be. There were also some Americans.
The great national types were more or less easy to discern--except the
Americans. That is, Chip Walker could see no one whom he could recognize
offhand as a fellow-countryman. Three gentlemanly, jovial Englishmen
were easily made out, because, in Walker's phrase, they "flocked by
themselves" and in the intervals of sitting in the Bundespalast
complained that Berne had no golf-links. They also dressed for dinner
and dined in the restaurant. A few others did the same. But the majority
of the distinguished men preferred to spend the evening in the costumes
they had worn all day, and, with their wives--there were eight or ten
dumpy, dowdy, smiling little wives--were content with the _table
d'hote_. Indeed, the popularity of the _table d'hote_ sifted the simple,
scholarly professors of Gottingen, Freiburg, or Geneva from the
representatives of the larger and more sophisticated social world,
leaving the latter to eat in the restaurant, _à la carte_.

In this way Chip came to observe a man of some distinction who took his
meals at a small table alone and kept to himself. He was a man who would
have been noticeable anywhere, if it were for no more than the dignified
gravity of his manner and the correctness of his dress. Not only did he
wear what was impeccably the right thing for the right occasion, but his
movements were of the sedate precision that never displaces a button. As
straight and slim and erect as a guardsman, he was nevertheless stamped
all over as a civilian. From the lines in his gray, clean-shaven face of
regular profile, and the silvery touches in his hair, Chip judged him to
be fifty years old. He puzzled the analyst of nationalities--though, as
Chip put it to himself, it was clear he must belong to one of the
peoples who were chic. He was, therefore, either English or French or
Russian or Austrian or American. There was a bare chance of his being a
Dane or a Swede. When he spoke to a waiter or a passing acquaintance,
it was in so low a tone that Walker couldn't detect the language he
used. All one could affirm from distant and superficial observation was
that he was Somebody--Somebody of position, experience, and
judgment--Somebody to respect.

That, perhaps, was the secret of Walker's curiosity--that he respected
him. He would have liked to talk to him--not precisely to ask his
advice, but to lay before him some of the difficulties that were
inchoate in his soul. He had an idea that this man with the grave,
suffering face--yes, there was suffering in his face, as one could see
on closer inspection!--would understand them.

He came to the conclusion that he was a Russian, though he had an early
opportunity to find out. As he stood one day by the concierge's desk the
stranger entered, paused, spoke a few words inaudible to Walker, and
passed on. It was a simple matter to ask his name of the one man who
knew every name in the hotel, and he was on the point of doing so. He
had already begun: "Voulez vous bien me dire--?" when he stopped. On
the whole he preferred his own speculations. In the long, idle hours
they gave him something to think of that took his mind from dwelling on
his own entangled affairs.

He counted, too, on the hazards of hotel life throwing them one day
together. He was already on speaking or nodding terms with most of the
distinguished men whom he could address in a common language. This had
come about by the simple means of propinquity on the terrace or in the
semicircular hall. He soon saw, however, that no diligence in
frequenting these places of reunion would help him with the stately
stranger whose interest he desired to win. The gentleman took the air
elsewhere.

For contiguous to the terrace of the hotel is a little public park
called the Kleine Schanze--haunt of well-behaved Bernese children, of
motherly Bernese housewives supplied with knitting and the gossip of the
town, of Bernese patriarchs in search of gentle exercise and sunshine.
This little park possesses a music-pavilion, a duck-pond, a monument to
the Postal Union of 1876, many pretty pathways, and an incomparable
promenade. The incomparable promenade has also an incomparable view on
those days when the Spirit of the Alps permits it to be visible.

Two such days at least there were during that month of June. Glancing
casually over his left shoulder as he marched one afternoon with head
bent and back turned toward the east, Chip saw that which a few minutes
before had been but the misty edge of the sky transformed into a range
of ineffable white peaks. The unexpectedness with which the glistering
spectacle appeared made his heart leap. It was like a celestial
vision--like a view of the ramparts of the Heavenly City. He clutched
the stone top of the balustrade beside which he stood, seeking terms
with which to make the moment indelible in his memory. Nothing came to
him but a few broken, obvious words--sublime!--inviolate!--eternal! and
such like.

What he chiefly felt was his inadequacy for even gazing on the sight,
much less for recording it, when he became aware that in the crowding of
people to the edge of the terrace the stranger was standing near him. It
was an opportunity not to be missed.

"Ça, c'est merveilleux, n'est-ce pas, monsieur?"

The words were banal, but they would serve to break the ice.

"Yes; and it becomes more marvelous the oftener it appears. I've never
seen it more beautiful than to-day; but perhaps that's because I've seen
it so many times."

Chip was disappointed to be answered in English, and especially in the
English of an American. It brought the man too near for confidence. They
might easily find themselves involved in a host of common acquaintances,
a fact that would preclude intimate talk. Had he been a Russian the
remoteness of each from the other's world would have made the exchange
of secrets--perhaps of secret griefs--a possibility. Not so with a man
whom one might meet the next time one entered a club in New York. Such a
man might even be.... But he dismissed that alarming thought as out of
the question. Edith wasn't at Berne. If she had been he would have seen
her. He would not inquire at the hotel, nor at any other hotel; but he
knew that in so small a town he must have had a glimpse of her
somewhere. While it was conceivable that her husband might have come to
Berne leaving her elsewhere, this was not the sort of man she would
have married. The type to appeal to her would be something like his
own--of course!

Nevertheless, as he had begun the conversation, he felt that in courtesy
he must go on with it. He did so by pointing with his stick to what he
took to be the highest summit of the range, and saying: "I suppose
that's the Jungfrau."

The stranger moved nearer him. "No, you're too far to the west. That's
the Breithorn. There's the Jungfrau"--he, too, pointed with his
stick--"sentineled by the Eiger and the Mönch."

He went on to indicate the Wetterhorn, the Schreckhorn, the Blumlisalp,
the Finsteraarhorn, and the Ebnefluh. They were like a row of shining
spiritual presences manifesting themselves to an unbelieving world.

For the moment they served their turn in helping Chip Walker to subjects
of conversation with his fellow-countryman, in whom he had lost some
interest because he was a fellow-countryman.

"You know a lot about Switzerland, don't you?" he observed, as the
stranger, still pointing with his stick and naming names--the
Silberhorn, the Gletschhorn, the Schneehorn, the Niesen, the
Bettfluh--that impressed the imagination with the force of the great
white peaks themselves, resolved the panorama into its minor elements.

The stick came down and the explanation ceased. "I've lived a good deal
abroad," was the response, given quietly. "You, too, haven't you?"

With the question they turned for the first time and looked each other
in the eyes. While Chip explained that he had spent his early years in
France or Italy or England, according to the interests of his parents,
he was inwardly remarking that the gray face, with its stiff lines, its
compressed lips, its unmoving expression, and its stamp of suffering,
was really sympathetic. Something in the composure of the manner and the
measured way of speaking imposed this new acquaintance on him as a
superior. Instinctively he said "sir" to him, as to an elder, though the
difference in their ages could not have been more than seven or eight
years. It flattered him somewhat, too, that the man who kept aloof from
others should make an exception of him and welcome his advances. They
parted with the tacit understanding that for the future, in the routine
of the hotel, they should be on speaking terms.

There was, however, no further meeting between them till after dinner on
the following evening. Turning from the purchase of stamps at the
concierge's desk, Chip saw his new acquaintance, wearing an Inverness
cloak over his dinner-jacket, and a soft felt hat, lighting a cigar.
There was an exchange of nods. On the older man's lips there was a ghost
of a smile. It seemed friendly. He spoke:

"You don't want to smoke a cigar in the little park? It's rather
pleasant there, with a full moon like this."

So it was that within a few minutes they found themselves seated side by
side on one of the benches of the terraced promenade where they had met
on the previous day. Though the row of shining spiritual presences had
withdrawn, the valley was spanned by a Velvety luminosity, through which
the lights of the lower town shone like stars reflected in water. The
talk was of the conference. The stranger spoke of himself:

"I've been interested in the various methods of international
communication for many years. In fact, I've made some slight study of
them. When the authorities were good enough to appoint me on this
commission I was glad to serve."

"Quite so," Chip murmured, politely.

"It's an attractive little town, too--one of the few capitals in Europe
that remain characteristic of their countries, and nothing else--wholly
or nearly unaffected by the current of life outside. But," he went on,
unexpectedly, "I wonder what a man like you can see in it--to remain
here so long?"

Chip was startled, but he managed to say: "It isn't that I see anything
in particular. I'm--"

"Waiting?"

The query was perfectly courteous. It implied no more than a casual
curiosity--hardly that.

"No; resting," Chip answered, with forced firmness.

"Ah, it's certainly a good place for resting." Then, after a pause:
"You're married, I think you said."

Chip didn't remember having said so, and replied to that effect. The
stranger was unperturbed.

"No? But you are?" By way of pressing the question, he added, with a
glance at Chip through the moonlight: "Aren't you?"

"I've a wife and little boy in New York," Walker answered, soberly.

"Ah!" There was no emphasis on this exclamation. It signified merely
that a certain point in their mutual understanding had been reached. "A
happy marriage must be a great--safeguard."

The tone was of a man making a moral reflection calmly, but Chip was
startled again. It was his turn to stare through the moonlight, where
the length of the bench lay between them. He felt that he was being
challenged, but that he must not betray himself too soon. "Safeguard
against what, sir?"

There was a faint laugh, or what might have been a laugh had there been
amusement in it. "Against everything from which a married man needs
protection."

Chip would have dropped the subject but for that sense that a challenge
was being thrown him before which he could not back down. Nevertheless,
he determined to keep from committing himself as long as possible. "I'm
not sure that I know what you mean."

The stranger seemed to examine the burning end of his cigar. "Oh,
nothing but the obvious things--pursuing another man's wife, for
instance. A man who's happily married doesn't do that."

There was no aggression in the tone, and yet Chip felt a curious chill.
Who was this man, and what the devil was he driving at? It was all he
could do to answer coolly, knocking the ash off the end of his own
cigar: "And yet, I've known of such cases."

"Oh, so have I. But there was always a screw loose somewhere--I mean, a
screw loose in what we're assuming to be the happy marriages."

"Are there any happy marriages?--permanently happy, that is?"

The response was surprisingly direct: "That's what I hoped you'd be able
to tell _me_."

"Then you don't know, sir?"

Again the response was surprisingly direct: "I don't know, because I'm
not happily married." A second later he added: "But other people may
be."

So they were going to exchange secrets, after all. "But you _are_
married, sir?" To clear the air, he felt himself obliged to add:
"Happily or unhappily."

"I married a lady who had divorced her husband." In the silence that
followed it seemed to Chip that he could hear the murmur of the almost
soundless river below. Somehow the sound of the river was all he could
think of. Quietly moving, low-voiced couples paced up and down the
promenade, and from the music-pavilion in the distance came the whine
and shiver of the Mattiche. "In divorce," the measured voice resumed,
"there are some dangerous risks. It's a dangerous risk for a man to
divorce his wife. It's a more dangerous risk for a woman to divorce her
husband. But to marry a divorced husband or a divorced wife is the most
dangerous risk of all."

Chip's voice was thick and dry. "May I ask, sir, on what you base
your--your opinion?"

"Chiefly on the principle that, no matter how successfully the dead are
buried, they may come back again as ghosts. No one can keep them from
doing that."

"And--and I presume, sir, that you held this theory when you married?"

"I held it _as_ a theory; I didn't know it as a fact."

Chip felt obliged to struggle onward. "And do I understand you to be
telling me now that the ghosts _have_ come back?"

"Perhaps you could as easily tell me."

It was a minute or more before Chip was able to say, in a voice he tried
to keep firm: "If they have come back, you're not more haunted by them
than--than any one else."

"So I understand."

The brief responses had the effect of dragging him forward. "And would
it be fair to ask why you say that?--that you understand?"

"Oh, quite fair. It's partly because you are here."

"Then you think I ought to go away?"

"I think--since you ask me--that you oughtn't to have come."

"I came--to rest."

"I don't question that. I'm only struck by--by the long arm of
coincidence."

"That is, you believe I had another motive?"

With a gesture he seemed to wave this aside. "That's hardly my affair.
You're here; and, since you are, I'd rather--"

"Yes?"

"I'd rather you didn't hurry away."

He rose on saying this, apparently with the intention of going back to
the hotel. Chip remained seated. He smoked mechanically, without knowing
what he did. Questions rose to his lips and died there. Was Edith in
Berne? Had she seen him? Was she keeping out of his way? Was she being
kept out of his way? Was she suffering? Was it through her that he had
been recognized? The fact that he _had_ been recognized brought with it
a kind of humiliation. The humiliation was the greater because of the
way in which he had singled out this man and approached him. During all
those days of studying the stranger with respectful discretion, seeking
an opportunity to address him, the stranger, without deigning him a
look, had known perfectly well who he was and had been imputing motives
to his presence. The reference to the long arm of coincidence was
stinging. Because it was so he tried to muster his dignity.

"I've no intention of hurrying away," he began; "but--"

"If you like, I'll put it this way," the measured voice broke in,
courteously. "If you have time to wait a little longer I should be glad
if you'd do it."

"Would there be any point to that?"

"I think you might trust me not to make the request if there were not."
He added presently: "It's a wise policy to let sleeping dogs lie; but
when they've once been roused, they've got to be quieted."

"Quieted--how?"

"I can't tell you that as yet. I may have some vague idea concerning the
process; I've none at all as to the result."

Chip was not sure that the stranger said good night. He knew he lifted
his hat and moved away. He watched him as, with stately, unhastening
step, he walked down the promenade, the Inverness cape and soft felt hat
silhouetted in the moonlight.

For the next forty-eight hours Walker hung about the hotel like a
culprit. He would have sacrificed even a glimpse of Edith to feel free
to go away. He couldn't go away while the other man's plans remained
enigmatical; but he wished he hadn't come. He felt his position
undignified, grotesque, like that of a boy detected in some bit of silly
daring.

Two days later they met again on the terrace of the Kleine Schanze. It
was not an accidental meeting. The stranger had walked directly up to
Chip to say:

"The lady to whom we were referring the other night--"

But Chip was still on his guard. "Did I refer to a lady?"

"Perhaps not. But I did. And that lady is ill. You may be interested to
know it. She was ill when she arrived in Paris from London ten days
ago."

"Then she's here."

"She's here. That's why I'm taking your time in asking you to remain."

Chip forced the next question with some difficulty: "Does she--does she
want to--to see me?"

"She hasn't said so."

"Has she--said anything about me at all?"

"That, I think, I must leave you to learn later. But I should like you
to know at once that I'm not keeping you here without a motive."

The stately figure moved on, leaving Chip to guess blindly at the
possibilities in store.

More days passed--nearly a week. Chip spent much of his time in the
Kleine Schanze, noticing that the distinguished stranger frequented it
less. Idleness would have got on his nerves, and Berne begun to bore
him, had it not been for the knowledge that he was under the same roof
with Edith. That gave him patience. It was the kind of comfort a man or
a woman finds in being near the prison where some loved one is shut up
in a cell.

It was again an afternoon when the shining spiritual presences were
making themselves visible--not with the gleaming suddenness with which
they had appeared ten days before, but slowly, with vague wonders, as if
finding it hard to bring themselves within mortal ken. Rounding the
corner of the promenade at the end remote from the hotel, at a point
from which he had the whole line of the bluff and the green depths of
the valley and the slopes of the Gurten and the curtain of Alpine mist
in one superb _coup d'oeil_, Chip saw a great white shoulder baring
itself luminously in the eastern sky. For long minutes that was all. It
might have been one of the gates of pearl of which he had heard tell.

It was the sort of thing from which no earth-dweller could take his
eyes. He stood leaning on his stick, his cigar smoldering in his left
hand. He couldn't see that the clouds lifted or that the mists rolled
away; he only grew aware that what seemed like a gate became a bastion,
and what seemed like a bastion rose into a tower, and that out of the
tower and in the midst of the tower and round about the tower white
pinnacles glistened in white air. Nothing had happened that he could
define, beyond a heightening of his own capacity to see. Nothing on that
horizon seemed to emerge or to recede: looking wrought the wonder; he
either saw or he didn't see; and just now he saw. He thought of
something he had heard or read--he had forgotten where: "Immediately
there fell from his eyes as it had been scales." That, apparently, was
the process, while the spiritual presences ranged themselves slowly
within his vision--row upon row, peak upon peak, dome upon dome,
serried, ghostly--white against a white sky, white in white air.

He withdrew his gaze only because the people, ever eager for this
spectacle which they had seen all their lives, crowded to the parapet.
As the children were still in school, it was a quiet throng, elderly and
sedate. Leaning on the balustrade, all faces turned one way, they
fringed the promenade, leaving the broad, paved spaces empty.

For this reason Chip's eye caught the more quickly at the other end of
the terrace the figures of a man and a woman who stood back from the
line of gazers. They were almost in profile toward himself, the man's
erect, stately form allowing the fact that a woman was clinging to his
arm to be just perceptible. It required no such movement as that of a
few minutes later--a movement by which the woman came more fully into
view--for Chip to recognize Edith.

_His_ Edith, _his wife_, clinging to another man's arm, clinging to her
husband's arm, clinging to the arm of a husband who was not himself,
dependent on him, supported by him, possessed by him, coming and going
with him, living and eating with him, bearing him children, sharing with
him whatever was most intimate, directed by him and dominated by
him!--yet, all the while, in everything that could make two beings one
except that stroke of the pen called law, _his wife_!

How had it come about? What had he done, what had she done, to make this
hideous topsyturvydom a fact? He put his hand to his forehead like a man
dazed; but he withdrew it quickly. His forehead was wet and clammy. He
was shaken, transpierced. He saw now that, in all the three years since
he had heard she was married, he hadn't really known it. Perhaps it was
his imagination that was at fault--perhaps his incapacity for believing
what wasn't under his very eyes--perhaps his own success in keeping the
dreadful fact at a distance--_but he hadn't really known it_. Nothing
could have brought it home to him like this--this glimpse of her
intimate association with the other man, and her dependence upon him.

His first impulse was to get out of their sight, to hide, to find some
place where he could grasp the appalling fact in silence and seclusion.
Second thoughts reminded him that there was a situation to be faced and
that he might as well face it now as at any other time. What sort of
situation it would be he couldn't guess; but he was sure that behind the
immobile mask of the other man's grave face there was something that
would be worth the penetration. He would give him a chance. He would go
forward to meet them. No, he wouldn't go forward to meet them; he would
wait for them where he stood. No, he wouldn't wait for them where he
stood; he would slip into the little rotunda close beside him--a little
rotunda generally occupied by motherly Bernese women, but which for the
moment the commanding spectacle outside had emptied.

It was a little open rotunda, with seats all round and a rude table in
the middle. In sitting down he placed himself as nearly as possible in
full view, but with his face toward the mountains. It gave him a
preoccupied air to be seen relighting his cigar. It was thus optional
with the couple who began to advance along the promenade to pass him by
or to pause and address him.

Nothing but a shadow warned him of their approach.

"Chip--"

He turned. Edith was standing in the doorway, the man behind her. The
haggard pallor of her face and the feverishness of her eyes reminded
Chip of the morning little Tom was born. He was on his feet--silent. He
couldn't even breathe her name. It was the less necessary since she
herself hastened to speak:

"Chip, Mr. Lacon knows we met in England. I told him as soon as I
reached Paris; I didn't want him not to know. And now he wants us all to
meet--I don't know why."

Since he had to say something, he uttered the first words that came to
him: "Was there any harm in it--our meeting? Mr. Lacon knows we have
children--and things to talk over."

"Oh, it isn't only that," she said, excitedly. "It's more. I don't know
what--but I know it's more."

He looked puzzled. "More in what way?"

"More in this way," said the measured voice, that had lost no shade of
its self-control. "I understand that Edith feels she has made a
mistake--that you've both made a mistake--"

[Illustration: Edith was standing in the doorway, the man behind her.
"Chip, Mr. Lacon knows we met in England."]

"I never said so," she interrupted, hurriedly.

Lacon smiled, as nearly as his saddened face could smile. "I didn't say
you said so," he corrected, gently. "I said I understood. There's a
difference. And, since I do understand, I feel it right to offer you--to
offer you both--"

Exhaustion compelled her to drop into a seat. "What are you going to
say?"

"Nothing that can hurt you, I hope--or--or Mr. Walker, either. Suppose
we all sit down?"

He followed his own suggestion with a dignity almost serene. Chip took
mechanically the seat from which he had just risen. It offered him the
resource of looking more directly at the range of glistening peaks than
at either of his two companions.

"The point for our consideration is this," Lacon resumed, as calmly as
if he were taking part in a meeting at the Bundespalast. "Admitting that
you've both made a mistake, is there any possibility of retracing your
steps?--or must you go on paying the penalty?"

Chip spoke without turning his eyes from the mountains: "What do you
mean by--the penalty?"

"I suppose I mean the necessity of making four people unhappy instead of
two."

"That is," Chip went on, "there are two who must be unhappy in any
case."

"Precisely. There are two for whom there's _no_ escape. Whatever happens
now, nothing can save _them_. But, since that is so, the question arises
whether it wouldn't be, let us say, a greater economy of human material
if the other two--"

Edith looked mystified. "I don't know what you mean. Which are the two
who must be unhappy in any case?"

Chip answered quietly, without turning his head: "He's one; my--my wife
is the other."

"Oh!" With something between a sigh and a gasp she fell back against a
pillar of the rotunda.

"It's the sort of economy of human material," Chip went on, his eye
following the lines of the Wetterhorn up and down, "that a man achieves
in saving himself from a sinking ship and leaving his wife and children
to drown--assuming that he can't rescue them."

"The comparison isn't quite exact," Lacon replied, courteously.
"Wouldn't it rather be that if a man can save only one of two women, he
nevertheless does what he can?"

Edith still looked bewildered. "I don't know what you're talking about,
either of you. What is it? Why are we here? Am I one of the two women to
be saved?"

"The suggestion is," Chip said, dryly, "that Mr. Lacon wouldn't oppose
your divorcing him, while my--my present wife might divorce me; after
which you and I could marry again. Isn't that it, sir?"

The older man nodded assent. "It's well to use plain English when we
can."

Chip continued to measure the Wetterhorn with his eye. "Rather comic the
whole thing would be, wouldn't it?"

"Possibly," Lacon replied, imperturbably. "But we've accepted the comic
in the institution of marriage, we Americans. It's too late for us to
attempt to take it without its possibilities of opera bouffe."

"But aren't there laws?" Edith asked.

Again Lacon's lips glimmered with the ghost of a smile. "Yes; but
they're very complacent laws. They reduce marriage to the legal
permission for two persons to live together as man and wife as long as
mutually agreeable; but the license is easily rescinded--and renewed."

"But surely marriage is more than that," she protested.

Lacon's ghost of a smile persisted. "Haven't we proved that it
isn't?--for us, at any rate. Hesitation to use our freedom in the future
would only stultify our action in the past. If we go in for an
institution with qualities of opera bouffe isn't it well to do it
light-heartedly?--or as light-heartedly as we can."

Edith looked at him reproachfully. "Should you be doing it
light-heartedly?"

"I said as light-heartedly as we can."

"What makes you think that Chip and I--I mean," she corrected, with some
confusion, "Mr. Walker and I--want to do it at all?"

"Isn't that rather evident?"

"I didn't know it was."

Chip glanced at them over his shoulder. It seemed to him that Lacon's
look was one of pity.

"You met in England," the latter said, displaying a hesitation unusual
in him, "with something--something more than pleasure, as I judge;
and--and Mr. Walker is here."

"Yes, by accident," she declared, hurriedly. "It was by accident in
England, too."

He lifted his fine white hand in protest. "Oh, I'm not blaming you. On
the contrary, nothing could be more natural than that you should both
feel as I--I imagine you do. You're the wife of his youth--he's the
husband of yours. The best things you've ever had in your two lives are
those you've had in common. That you should want to bridge over the
past, and, if possible, go back--"

"We've burned our bridges," she interrupted, quickly.

"Even burned bridges can be rebuilt if there's the will to do it. The
whole question turns on the will. If you have that I want you to
understand that I shall not be--be an obstacle to the--to the
reconstruction."

"Don't you _care_?"

"That's not the question. We've already assumed the fact that my
caring--as well as that of a certain other person whom Mr. Walker would
have to consider--is secondary. It's too late to do anything for
us--assuming that she understands, or may come to understand, the
position as I do. Your refusing happiness for yourselves in order to
stand by us, or even to stand by the children--the younger children, I
mean--wouldn't do us any good. On the contrary, as far as I'm concerned,
if there could be any such thing as mitigation--"

He broke off. Seeing the immobile features swept as by convulsion, Chip
took up the sentence: "It would be that Edith should feel free."

"Precisely."

"And her not feeling free would involve the continuance of--the
penalty."

"In its extreme form." He regained control of himself. "That the
penalty should be abrogated altogether is out of the question. Some of
us must go on paying it--all four of us, indeed, to some degree. And
yet, any relief for one would be some relief for all. Do you see what I
mean?"

The question was addressed to Edith specially.

"I'm not sure that I do," she replied, looking at him wistfully. "Is it
this?--that, assuming what you do assume, it would be easier for you if
I--I went away?"

"I shouldn't put it in just those words, I only mean that what's
hardest for you is hardest for me. I couldn't hold you to the letter of
one contract if you were keeping the spirit of another. Do you see now?"

She didn't answer at once, so that Chip intervened: "Hasn't some one
said--Shakespeare or some one--that the letter killeth? It seems to me
I've heard that."

"You probably have. Some one has said it. But He also added, as a
balancing clause, 'The Spirit giveth life.' That's the vital part of it.
To find out where the spirit is in our present situation is the question
now."

She looked at him tearfully. "Well, _where_ is it?"

He rose quietly. "That's for you and Mr. Walker to discover for
yourselves. I've gone as far as I dare."

"You're not going away?" she asked, hastily.

He smiled at them both. For the first time in Chip's acquaintance with
him it was a positive smile. "I think you'll most easily find your way
alone."

"Oh no. Wait!" she begged; but he had already lifted his hat in his
stately way and begun to walk back toward the hotel.

Then came the bliss of being alone together. In spite of everything,
they felt that. Edith leaned across the rude table, her hands clasped
upon it. She spoke rapidly, as if to make full use of the time.

"Oh, Chip, what are we to do?"

He too leaned across the table, his arms folded upon it, the extinct
cigar still between his fingers. He gazed deep into her eyes. "It's a
chance. It will never come again. Shall we take it?--or let it go?"

"Could you take it, if I did?"

"Could you--if I did?"

She tried to reflect. "It's the spirit," she said, haltingly, after a
minute. "Oughtn't we to get at that?--just as he said. We've had so much
of--of the letter."

"Ah, but what _is_ the spirit? How _do_ you get at it? That's the
point."

She tried to reflect further--further and harder and faster. "Wouldn't
it be--what we _feel_?"

"What we feel is that--that we love each other, isn't it?--that we love
each other as much as we did years ago--more!--more! Isn't that it?"

She nodded. "Yes, more--oh, much more! And yet--"

"Yes?" he said, eagerly. "Yes? And what, then?"

"And yet--oh, Chip, I feel something else!" She leaned still further
toward him, as if to annihilate the slight distance between them. "Don't
you?"

"Something else--how?"

"Something else--higher--as if our loving each other wasn't the thing of
most importance. I thought it was. All these years--I mean
latterly--I've thought it was. When we met in England I was sure it was.
Since I've been back with him I've felt that I would have died gladly
just to have one more day with you, like those at Maidenhead and
Tunbridge Wells. But now--oh, Chip, I don't know _what_ to say!"

"Is it because he's been so generous?"

She shook her head. "Not altogether. No; I don't think it's that at all.
He's more than generous; he's tender. You can't think how tender he
is--and always has been--with me and with the children. That's why I
married him--why I thought I could find a sort of rest with him. You see
that, don't you?--without judging me too harshly. He's that kind. I'm
used to it with him. He can't help being generous. I knew he would be
when I told him we'd met in England. I told him because I couldn't do
anything else. It was a way of talking about you--even if it was only
that way. But, oh, Chip, if I left him now and went back to you--"

"Yes, darling? What?" He spoke huskily, covering both her hands with one
of his and crushing them. "If you left him now and came back to
me--what?"

She hurried on. "And then there's--there's the other woman. We mustn't
forget _her_. What's her name, Chip?"

"Lily. She was Lily Bland."

"Yes, yes; of course. I knew that. And she loves you? But how could she
help loving you? I'd hate her if she didn't. Curiously enough I don't
hate her now. I wonder why? I suppose it's because I'm so sorry for her.
She's a sweet woman, isn't she?"

He answered, with head averted. "She's as noble in her way as--as this
man is in his."

"That's just what I thought. I used to see her when she came to our
house to call for the children. It never occurred to me that you'd
marry her. If it had I don't know what I should have--But it's no use
going back to that now. What would you do about her, Chip, if we decided
to--to take the chance that's opened up--?"

"I don't know. I've never thought about it. I--I suppose she'd let me
go--just as he's letting you go--if I put it to her in the right way."

"And what would be the right way?"

"Oh, Lord, Edith, don't ask me. How do _I_ know? I should have to tell
her--the truth."

"And what would happen then?--to her I mean."

"I've no idea. She'd bear up against it. She's that sort of person. But
then, inwardly, she'd very likely break her heart."

"Oh, Chip, is it worth while? Think!"

"I _am_ thinking."

"Is it the spirit? That's the thing to find out."

He shook his head sadly. "I don't know how to tell."

"But suppose I do? Would you trust to me? Would you believe that the
thing I felt to be right for me was the right thing for us both?"

"I think I should."

"Well, then, listen. It's this way. You know, Chip, I love you." She had
his hand now in both of hers, twisting her fingers nervously in and out
between his. "I don't have to tell you, do I? I love you. Oh, how I love
you! It's as if the very heart had gone out of my body into yours. And
yet, Chip--oh, don't be angry--it seems to me that if I left him now and
went back to you I should become something vile. It _isn't_ because he's
so noble and good. No, it isn't that. And it isn't just the idea of
passing from one man to another and back again. We _have_ turned
marriage into opera bouffe, we Americans, and we might as well take it
as we've made it. It isn't that at all. It's--it's exactly what you said
just now: it's like a man swimming away from a sinking ship, and leaving
his wife and children to drown, because he can't rescue them. Better a
thousand times to go down with them, isn't it? You may call it waste of
human material, if you like, and yet--well, you know what I mean. I
should be leaving him to drown and you'd be leaving her to drown; and,
even though we _can't_ give them happiness by standing by, yet it's some
satisfaction just to _stand_ by. Isn't that it? Isn't that the spirit?"

He withdrew his hand from hers to cover his eyes with it. He spoke
hoarsely: "It may be. I--I think it is."

"But, _if_ it is, then the spirit of the contract is different now from
what it would have been--well, you know when. Then it meant that I
should have stood by _you_--forgiven you, if that's the word--and shown
myself truly your wife, for better or for worse. I didn't understand
that. I only knew about the better. I didn't see that a man and a woman
might take each other for worse--and still be true. If I had seen
it--oh, what a happy woman I should have been to-day, and in all these
years in which I haven't been happy at all! That was the spirit of the
contract then, I suppose--but now it's different. It confuses me a
little. Doesn't it confuse you?"

"Perhaps."

"Let me take your hand again; I can talk to you better like that.
Now--_now_--we've undertaken new responsibilities. We've involved
others. We've let them involve themselves. We can't turn our back upon
them, can we? No. I thought that's what you'd say. We can't. The
contract we've made with them must come before the one we made with each
other. We're bound, not only in law but in honor. Aren't we?"

He made some inarticulate sign of assent.

"And I suppose that's what he meant by the penalty--the penalty in its
extreme form: that we've put ourselves where we can't keep the higher
contract, the complete one, we made together--because we're bound by one
lower and incomplete, to which we've got to be faithful. Isn't that the
spirit _now_, don't you think?"

Again he muttered something inarticulately assenting.

"Well, then, Chip, I'm going." She rose with the words.

"No, no; not yet." He caught her hand in both of his, holding it as he
leaned across the table.

"Yes, Chip, now. What do we gain by my staying? We see the thing we've
got to do--and we must do it. We must begin on the instant. If I were to
stay a minute longer now, it would be--it would be for things we've
recognized as no longer permissible. I'm going. I'm going now!"

There was something in her face that induced him to relax his hold. She
withdrew her hand slowly, her eyes on his.

"Aren't you going to say good-by?"

She shook her head, from the little doorway of the rotunda. "No. What's
the use? What good-by is possible between you and me? I'm--I'm just
going."

And she was gone.

With a quick movement he sprang to the opening between two of the small
pillars. "Edith!" She turned. "Edith! Come here. Come here, for God's
sake! Only one word more."

She came back slowly, not to the door, but to the opening through which
he leaned, his knee on the seat inside. "What is it?"

He got possession of her hand. "Tell me again that quotation he gave
us."

She repeated it: "'The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.'"

"Good, isn't it? I suppose it _is_ from Shakespeare?"

"I don't know. I'll ask him--I'll look it up. If ever I see you again
I'll tell you."

"I wish you would, because--because, if it gives us _life_, perhaps
it'll carry us along."

With a quick movement he drew her to him and kissed her passionately on
the lips.

A minute later he had sunk back on the seat out of which he had sprung.
He knew she was disappearing through the crowd that, satiated with
gazing, was sauntering away from the parapet. But he made no attempt to
follow her with so much as a glance. Slowly, vaguely, mistily, like a
man tired of the earthly vision, he was letting his eyes roam along the
line of shining spiritual presences.

THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Letter of the Contract, by Basil King

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LETTER OF THE CONTRACT ***

***** This file should be named 20443-8.txt or 20443-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/4/4/20443/

Produced by Roger Frank and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
