The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Tale of Beowulf, by Anonymous, Translated
by William Morris and Alfred John Wyatt


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Tale of Beowulf
       Sometime King of the Folk of the Weder Geats


Author: Anonymous



Release Date: January 23, 2007  [eBook #20431]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF BEOWULF***


E-text prepared by Louise Hope, R. Cedron, and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/c/)



Transcriber's note:

   In the printed book, line numbering was determined by the physical
   length of a line. Sometimes the numbered line was one or even two
   lines above or below the nearest multiple of 10. Where a stanza ended
   on a multiple of 10, the first line of the following stanza was
   numbered instead. Line numbers have been regularized for this e-text.





THE TALE OF BEOWULF
Sometime King of the
Folk of the Weder Geats

Translated by

WILLIAM MORRIS and A. J. WYATT







Longmans, Green, and Co.
39 Paternoster Row, London
New York and Bombay
MCMIV

Bibliographical Note

First printed at the Kelmscott Press, January 1895
Ordinary Edition . . . . . . . . . . . August 1898
Reprinted  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . August 1904




ARGUMENT

Hrothgar, king of the Danes, lives happily and peacefully, and bethinks
him to build a glorious hall called Hart. But a little after, one
Grendel, of the kindred of the evil wights that are come of Cain, hears
the merry noise of Hart and cannot abide it; so he enters thereinto by
night, and slays and carries off and devours thirty of Hrothgar's
thanes. Thereby he makes Hart waste for twelve years, and the tidings of
this mishap are borne wide about lands. Then comes to the helping of
Hrothgar Beowulf, the son of Ecgtheow, a thane of King Hygelac of the
Geats, with fourteen fellows. They are met on the shore by the
land-warder, and by him shown to Hart and the stead of Hrothgar, who
receives them gladly, and to whom Beowulf tells his errand, that he will
help him against Grendel. They feast in the hall, and one Unferth, son
of Ecglaf, taunts Beowulf through jealousy that he was outdone by Breca
in swimming. Beowulf tells the true tale thereof. And a little after, at
nightfall, Hrothgar and his folk leave the hall Hart, and it is given in
charge to Beowulf, who with his Geats abides there the coming of
Grendel.

Soon comes Grendel to the hall, and slays a man of the Geats, hight
Handshoe, and then grapples with Beowulf, who will use no weapon against
him: Grendel feels himself over-mastered and makes for the door, and
gets out, but leaves his hand and arm behind him with Beowulf: men on
the wall hear the great noise of this battle and the wailing of Grendel.
In the morning the Danes rejoice, and follow the bloody slot of Grendel,
and return to Hart racing and telling old tales, as of Sigemund and the
Worm. Then come the king and his thanes to look on the token of victory,
Grendel's hand and arm, which Beowulf has let fasten: to the hall-gable.

The king praises Beowulf and rewards him, and they feast in Hart, and
the tale of Finn and Hengest is told. Then Hrothgar leaves Hart, and so
does Beowulf also with his Geats, but the Danes keep guard there.

In the night comes in Grendel's Mother, and catches up Aeschere, a thane
of Hrothgar, and carries him off to her lair. In the morning is Beowulf
fetched to Hrothgar, who tells him of this new grief and craves his
help.

Then they follow up the slot and come to a great water-side, and find
thereby Aeschere's head, and the place is known for the lair of those
two: monsters are playing in the deep, and Beowulf shoots one of them to
death. Then Beowulf dights him and leaps into the water, and is a day's
while reaching the bottom. There he is straightway caught hold of by
Grendel's Mother, who bears him into her hall. When he gets free he
falls on her, but the edge of the sword Hrunting (lent to him by
Unferth) fails him, and she casts him to the ground and draws her sax to
slay him; but he rises up, and sees an old sword of the giants hanging
on the wall; he takes it and smites off her head therewith. He sees
Grendel lying dead, and his head also he strikes off; but the blade of
the sword is molten in his venomous blood. Then Beowulf strikes upward,
taking with him the head of Grendel and the hilts of the sword. When he
comes to the shore he finds his Geats there alone; for the Danes fled
when they saw the blood floating in the water.

They go up to Hrothgar's stead, and four men must needs bear the head.
They come to Hrothgar, and Beowulf gives him the hilts and tells him
what he has done. Much praise is given to Beowulf; and they feast
together.

On the morrow Beowulf bids farewell to Hrothgar, more gifts are given,
and messages are sent to Hygelac: Beowulf departs with the full love of
Hrothgar. The Geats come to their ship and reward the ship-warder, and
put off and sail to their own land. Beowulf comes to Hygelac's house.
Hygelac is told of, and his wife Hygd, and her good conditions, against
whom is set as a warning the evil Queen Thrytho.

Beowulf tells all the tale of his doings in full to Hygelac, and gives
him his gifts, and the precious-gemmed collar to Hygd. Here is told of
Beowulf, and how he was contemned in his youth, and is now grown so
renowned.

Time wears; Hygelac is slain in battle; Heardred, his son, reigns in his
stead, he is slain by the Swedes, and Beowulf is made king. When he is
grown old, and has been king for fifty years, come new tidings. A great
dragon finds on the sea-shore a mound wherein is stored the treasure of
ancient folk departed. The said dragon abides there, and broods the gold
for 300 years.

Now a certain thrall, who had misdone against his lord and was fleeing
from his wrath, haps on the said treasure and takes a cup thence, which
he brings to his lord to appease his wrath. The Worm waketh, and findeth
his treasure lessened, but can find no man who hath done the deed.
Therefore he turns on the folk, and wars on them, and burns Beowulf's
house.

Now Beowulf will go and meet the Worm. He has an iron shield made, and
sets forth with eleven men and the thrall the thirteenth. He comes to
the ness, and speaks to his men, telling them of his past days, and
gives them his last greeting: then he cries out a challenge to the Worm,
who comes forth, and the battle begins: Beowulf's sword will not bite on
the Worm. Wiglaf eggs on the others to come to Beowulf's help, and goes
himself straightway, and offers himself to Beowulf; the Worm comes on
again, and Beowulf breaks his sword Nægling on him, and the Worm wounds
Beowulf. Wiglaf smites the Worm in the belly; Beowulf draws his ax, and
between them they slay the Worm.

Beowulf now feels his wounds, and knows that he is hurt deadly; he sits
down by the wall, and Wiglaf bathes his wounds. Beowulf speaks, tells
how he would give his armour to his son if he had one; thanks God that
he has not sworn falsely or done guilefully; and prays Wiglaf to bear
out the treasure that he may see it before he dies.

Wiglaf fetches out the treasure, and again bathes Beowulf's wounds;
Beowulf speaks again, rejoices over the sight of the treasure; gives to
Wiglaf his ring and his armour, and bids the manner of his bale-fire.
With that he passes away. Now the dastards come thereto and find Wiglaf
vainly bathing his dead lord. He casteth shame upon them with great
wrath. Thence he sends a messenger to the barriers of the town, who
comes to the host, and tells them of the death of Beowulf. He tells
withal of the old feud betwixt the Geats and the Swedes, and how these,
when they hear of the death of the king, will be upon them. The warriors
go to look on Beowulf, and find him and the Worm lying dead together.
Wiglaf chooses out seven of them to go void the treasure-house, after
having bidden them gather wood for the bale-fire. They shove the Worm
over the cliff into the sea, and bear off the treasure in wains. Then
they bring Beowulf's corpse to bale, and they kindle it; a woman called
the wife of aforetime, it may be Hygd, widow of Hygelac, bemoans him:
and twelve children of the athelings ride round the bale, and bemoan
Beowulf and praise him: and thus ends the poem.




THE STORY OF BEOWULF




  I. AND FIRST OF THE KINDRED OF HROTHGAR.


  What! we of the Spear-Danes of yore days, so was it
  That we learn'd of the fair fame of kings of the folks
  And the athelings a-faring in framing of valour.
  Oft then Scyld the Sheaf-son from the hosts of the scathers,
  From kindreds a many the mead-settles tore;
  It was then the earl fear'd them, sithence was he first
  Found bare and all-lacking; so solace he bided,
  Wax'd under the welkin in worship to thrive,
  Until it was so that the round-about sitters
  All over the whale-road must hearken his will                       10
  And yield him the tribute. A good king was that,
  By whom then thereafter a son was begotten,
  A youngling in garth, whom the great God sent thither
  To foster the folk; and their crime-need he felt
  The load that lay on them while lordless they lived
  For a long while and long. He therefore, the Life-lord,
  The Wielder of glory, world's worship he gave him:
  Brim Beowulf waxed, and wide the weal upsprang
  Of the offspring of Scyld in the parts of the Scede-lands.
  Such wise shall a youngling with wealth be a-working                20
  With goodly fee-gifts toward the friends of his father,
  That after in eld-days shall ever bide with him,
  Fair fellows well-willing when wendeth the war-tide,
  Their lief lord a-serving. By praise-deeds it shall be
  That in each and all kindreds a man shall have thriving.
  Then went his ways Scyld when the shapen while was,
  All hardy to wend him to the lord and his warding:
  Out then did they bear him to the side of the sea-flood,
  The dear fellows of him, as he himself pray'd them
  While yet his word wielded the friend of the Scyldings,             30
  The dear lord of the land; a long while had he own'd it.
  With stem all be-ringed at the hythe stood the ship,
  All icy and out-fain, the Atheling's ferry.
  There then did they lay him, the lord well beloved,
  The gold-rings' bestower, within the ship's barm,
  The mighty by mast. Much there was the treasure,
  From far ways forsooth had the fret-work been led:
  Never heard I of keel that was comelier dighted
  With weapons of war, and with weed of the battle,
  With bills and with byrnies. There lay in his barm                  40
  Much wealth of the treasure that with him should be,
  And he into the flood's might afar to depart.
  No lesser a whit were the wealth-goods they dight him
  Of the goods of the folk, than did they who aforetime,
  When was the beginning, first sent him away
  Alone o'er the billows, and he but a youngling.
    Moreover they set him up there a sign golden
  High up overhead, and let the holm bear him,
  Gave all to the Spearman. Sad mind they had in them,
  And mourning their mood was. Now never knew men,                    50
  For sooth how to say it, rede-masters in hall,
  Or heroes 'neath heaven, to whose hands came the lading.




  II. CONCERNING HROTHGAR,
  AND HOW HE BUILT THE HOUSE CALLED HART.
  ALSO GRENDEL IS TOLD OF.


  In the burgs then was biding Beowulf the Scylding,
  Dear King of the people, for long was he dwelling
  Far-famed of folks (his father turn'd elsewhere,
  From his stead the Chief wended) till awoke to him after
  Healfdene the high, and long while he held it,
  Ancient and war-eager, o'er the glad Scyldings:
  Of his body four bairns are forth to him rimed;
  Into the world woke the leader of war-hosts                         60
  Heorogar; eke Hrothgar, and Halga the good;
  Heard I that Elan queen was she of Ongentheow,
  That Scylding of battle, the bed-mate behalsed.
    Then was unto Hrothgar the war-speed given,
  Such worship of war that his kin and well-willers
  Well hearken'd his will till the younglings were waxen,
  A kin-host a many. Then into his mind ran
  That he would be building for him now a hall-house,
  That men should be making a mead-hall more mighty
  Than the children of ages had ever heard tell of:                   70
  And there within eke should he be out-dealing
  To young and to old all things God had given,
  Save the share of the folk and the life-days of men.
  Then heard I that widely the work was a-banning
  To kindreds a many the Middle-garth over
  To fret o'er that folk-stead. So befell to him timely
  Right soon among men that made was it yarely
  The most of hall-houses, and Hart its name shap'd he,
  Who wielded his word full widely around.
  His behest he belied not; it was he dealt the rings,                80
  The wealth at the high-tide. Then up rose the hall-house,
  High up and horn-gabled. Hot surges it bided
  Of fire-flame the loathly, nor long was it thenceforth
  Ere sorely the edge-hate 'twixt Son and Wife's Father
  After the slaughter-strife there should awaken.
    Then the ghost heavy-strong bore with it hardly
  E'en for a while of time, bider in darkness,
  That there on each day of days heard he the mirth-tide
  Loud in the hall-house. There was the harp's voice,
  And clear song of shaper. Said he who could it                      90
  To tell the first fashion of men from aforetime;
  Quoth how the Almighty One made the Earth's fashion,
  The fair field and bright midst the bow of the Waters,
  And with victory beglory'd set Sun and Moon,
  Bright beams to enlighten the biders on land:
  And how he adorned all parts of the earth
  With limbs and with leaves; and life withal shaped
  For the kindred of each thing that quick on earth wendeth.
    So liv'd on all happy the host of the kinsmen
  In game and in glee, until one wight began,                        100
  A fiend out of hell-pit, the framing of evil,
  And Grendel forsooth the grim guest was hight,
  The mighty mark-strider, the holder of moorland,
  The fen and the fastness. The stead of the fifel
  That wight all unhappy a while of time warded,
  Sithence that the Shaper him had for-written.
    On the kindred of Cain the Lord living ever
  Awreaked the murder of the slaying of Abel.
  In that feud he rejoic'd not, but afar him He banish'd,
  The Maker, from mankind for the crime he had wrought.              110
  But offspring uncouth thence were they awoken
  Eotens and elf-wights, and ogres of ocean,
  And therewith the Giants, who won war against God
  A long while; but He gave them their wages therefor.




  III. HOW GRENDEL FELL UPON HART AND WASTED IT.


  Now went he a-spying, when come was the night-tide,
  The house on high builded, and how there the Ring-Danes
  Their beer-drinking over had boune them to bed;
  And therein he found them, the atheling fellows,
  Asleep after feasting. Then sorrow they knew not
  Nor the woe of mankind: but the wight of wealth's waning,          120
  The grim and the greedy, soon yare was he gotten,
  All furious and fierce, and he raught up from resting
  A thirty of thanes, and thence aback got him
  Right fain of his gettings, and homeward to fare,
  Fulfilled of slaughter his stead to go look on.
    Thereafter at dawning, when day was yet early,
  The war-craft of Grendel to men grew unhidden,
  And after his meal was the weeping uphoven,
  Mickle voice of the morning-tide: there the Prince mighty,
  The Atheling exceeding good, unblithe he sat,                      130
  Tholing the heavy woe; thane-sorrow dreed he
  Since the slot of the loathly wight there they had look'd on,
  The ghost all accursed. O'er grisly the strife was,
  So loathly and longsome. No longer the frist was
  But after the wearing of one night; then fram'd he
  Murder-bales more yet, and nowise he mourned
  The feud and the crime; over fast therein was he.
  Then easy to find was the man who would elsewhere
  Seek out for himself a rest was more roomsome,
  Beds end-long the bowers, when beacon'd to him was,                140
  And soothly out told by manifest token,
  The hate of the hell-thane. He held himself sithence
  Further and faster who from the fiend gat him.
    In such wise he rul'd it and wrought against right,
  But one against all, until idle was standing
  The best of hall-houses; and mickle the while was,
  Twelve winter-tides' wearing; and trouble he tholed,
  That friend of the Scyldings, of woes every one
  And wide-spreading sorrows: for sithence it fell
  That unto men's children unbidden 'twas known                      150
  Full sadly in singing, that Grendel won war
  'Gainst Hrothgar a while of time, hate-envy waging,
  And crime-guilts and feud for seasons no few,
  And strife without stinting. For the sake of no kindness
  Unto any of men of the main-host of Dane-folk
  Would he thrust off the life-bale, or by fee-gild allay it,
  Nor was there a wise man that needed to ween
  The bright boot to have at the hand of the slayer.
  The monster the fell one afflicted them sorely,
  That death-shadow darksome the doughty and youthful                160
  Enfettered, ensnared; night by night was he faring
  The moorlands the misty. But never know men
  Of spell-workers of Hell to and fro where they wander.
  So crime-guilts a many the foeman of mankind,
  The fell alone-farer, fram'd oft and full often,
  Cruel hard shames and wrongful, and Hart he abode in,
  The treasure-stain'd hall, in the dark of the night-tide;
  But never the gift-stool therein might he greet,
  The treasure before the Creator he trow'd not.
    Mickle wrack was it soothly for the friend of the Scyldings,     170
  Yea heart and mood breaking. Now sat there a many
  Of the mighty in rune, and won them the rede
  Of what thing for the strong-soul'd were best of all things
  Which yet they might frame 'gainst the fear and the horror.
  And whiles they behight them at the shrines of the heathen
  To worship the idols; and pray'd they in words,
  That he, the ghost-slayer, would frame for them helping
  'Gainst the folk-threats and evil So far'd they their wont,
  The hope of the heathen; nor hell they remember'd
  In mood and in mind. And the Maker they knew not,                  180
  The Doomer of deeds: nor of God the Lord wist they,
  Nor the Helm of the Heavens knew aught how to hery,
  The Wielder of Glory. Woe worth unto that man
  Who through hatred the baneful his soul shall shove into
  The fire's embrace; nought of fostering weens he,
  Nor of changing one whit. But well is he soothly
  That after the death-day shall seek to the Lord,
  In the breast of the Father all peace ever craving.




  IV. NOW COMES BEOWULF ECGTHEOW'S SON
  TO THE LAND OF THE DANES,
  AND THE WALL-WARDEN SPEAKETH WITH HIM.


  So care that was time-long the kinsman of Healfdene
  Still seeth'd without ceasing, nor might the wise warrior          190
  Wend otherwhere woe, for o'er strong was the strife
  All loathly so longsome late laid on the people,
  Need-wrack and grim nithing, of night-bales the greatest.
    Now that from his home heard the Hygelac's thane,
  Good midst of the Geat-folk; of Grendel's deeds heard he.
  But he was of mankind of might and main mightiest
  In the day that we tell of, the day of this life,
  All noble, strong-waxen. He bade a wave-wearer
  Right good to be gear'd him, and quoth he that the war-king
  Over the swan-road he would be seeking,                            200
  The folk-lord far-famed, since lack of men had he.
  Forsooth of that faring the carles wiser-fashion'd
  Laid little blame on him, though lief to them was he;
  The heart-hardy whetted they, heeded the omen.
  There had the good one, e'en he of the Geat-folk,
  Champions out-chosen of them that he keenest
  Might find for his needs; and he then the fifteenth,
  Sought to the sound-wood. A swain thereon show'd him,
  A sea-crafty man, all the make of the land-marks.
    Wore then a while, on the waves was the floater,                 210
  The boat under the berg, and yare then the warriors
  Strode up on the stem; the streams were a-winding
  The sea 'gainst the sands. Upbore the swains then
  Up into the bark's barm the bright-fretted weapons,
  The war-array stately; then out the lads shov'd her,
  The folk on the welcome way shov'd out the wood-bound.
  Then by the wind driven out o'er the wave-holm
  Far'd the foamy-neck'd floater most like to a fowl,
  Till when was the same tide of the second day's wearing
  The wound-about-stemm'd one had waded her way,                     220
  So that then they that sail'd her had sight of the land,
  Bleak shine of the sea-cliffs, bergs steep up above,
  Sea-nesses wide reaching; the sound was won over,
  The sea-way was ended: then up ashore swiftly
  The band of the Weder-folk up on earth wended;
  They bound up the sea-wood, their sarks on them rattled,
  Their weed of the battle, and God there they thanked
  For that easy the wave-ways were waxen unto them.
    But now from the wall saw the Scylding-folks' warder,
  E'en he whom the holm-cliffs should ever be holding,               230
  Men bear o'er the gangway the bright shields a-shining,
  Folk-host gear all ready. Then mind-longing wore him,
  And stirr'd up his mood to wot who were the men-folk.
  So shoreward down far'd he his fair steed a-riding,
  Hrothgar's Thane, and full strongly then set he a-quaking
  The stark wood in his hands, and in council-speech speer'd he:
    What men be ye then of them that have war-gear,
  With byrnies bewarded, who the keel high up-builded
  Over the Lake-street thus have come leading.
  Hither o'er holm-ways hieing in ring-stem?                         240
  End-sitter was I, a-holding the sea-ward,
  That the land of the Dane-folk none of the loathly
  Faring with ship-horde ever might scathe it.
  None yet have been seeking more openly hither
  Of shield-havers than ye, and ye of the leave-word
  Of the framers of war naught at all wotting,
  Or the manners of kinsmen. But no man of earls greater
  Saw I ever on earth than one of you yonder,
  The warrior in war-gear: no hall-man, so ween I,
  Is that weapon-beworthy'd, but his visage belie him,               250
  The sight seen once only. Now I must be wotting
  The spring of your kindred ere further ye cast ye,
  And let loose your false spies in the Dane-land a-faring
  Yet further afield. So now, ye far-dwellers,
  Ye wenders o'er sea-flood, this word do ye hearken
  Of my one-folded thought: and haste is the handiest
  To do me to wit of whence is your coming.




  V. HERE BEOWULF MAKES ANSWER TO THE LAND-WARDEN,
  WHO SHOWETH HIM THE WAY TO THE KING'S ABODE.


  He then that was chiefest in thus wise he answer'd,
  The war-fellows' leader unlock'd he the word-hoard:
  We be a people of the Weder-Geats' man-kin                         260
  And of Hygelac be we the hearth-fellows soothly.
  My father before me of folks was well-famed
  Van-leader and atheling, Ecgtheow he hight.
  Many winters abode he, and on the way wended
  An old man from the garths, and him well remembers
  Every wise man well nigh wide yond o'er the earth.
  Through our lief mood and friendly the lord that is thine,
  Even Healfdene's son, are we now come a-seeking,
  Thy warder of folk. Learn us well with thy leading,
  For we have to the mighty an errand full mickle,                   270
  To the lord of the Dane-folk: naught dark shall it be,
  That ween I full surely. If it be so thou wottest,
  As soothly for our parts we now have heard say,
  That one midst of the Scyldings, who of scathers I wot not,
  A deed-hater secret, in the dark of the night-tide
  Setteth forth through the terror the malice untold of,
  The shame-wrong and slaughter. I therefore to Hrothgar
  Through my mind fashion'd roomsome the rede may now learn him,
  How he, old-wise and good, may get the fiend under,
  If once more from him awayward may turn                            280
  The business of bales, and the boot come again,
  And the weltering of care wax cooler once more;
  Or for ever sithence time of stress he shall thole,
  The need and the wronging, the while yet there abideth
  On the high stead aloft the best of all houses.
    Then spake out the warden on steed there a-sitting,
  The servant all un-fear'd: It shall be of either
  That the shield-warrior sharp the sundering wotteth,
  Of words and of works, if he think thereof well.
  I hear it thus said that this host here is friendly                290
  To the lord of the Scyldings; forth fare ye then, bearing
  Your weed and your weapons, of the way will I wise you;
  Likewise mine own kinsmen I will now be bidding
  Against every foeman your floater before us,
  Your craft but new-tarred, the keel on the sand,
  With honour to hold, until back shall be bearing
  Over the lake-streams this one, the lief man,
  The wood of the wounden-neck back unto Wedermark.
  Unto such shall be granted amongst the good-doers
  To win the way out all whole from the war-race.                    300
  Then boun they to faring, the bark biding quiet;
  Hung upon hawser the wide-fathom'd ship
  Fast at her anchor. Forth shone the boar-shapes
  Over the check-guards golden adorned,
  Fair-shifting, fire-hard; ward held the farrow.
  Snorted the war-moody, hasten'd the warriors
  And trod down together until the hall timbered,
  Stately and gold-bestain'd, gat they to look on,
  That was the all-mightiest unto earth's dwellers
  Of halls 'neath the heavens, wherein bode the mighty;              310
  Glisten'd the gleam thereof o'er lands a many.
  Unto them then the war-deer the court of the proud one
  Full clearly betaught it, that they therewithal
  Might wend their ways thither. Then he of the warriors
  Round wended his steed, and spake a word backward:
  Time now for my faring; but the Father All-wielder
  May He with all helping henceforward so hold you
  All whole in your wayfaring. Will I to sea-side
  Against the wroth folk to hold warding ever.




  VI. BEOWULF AND THE GEATS COME INTO HART.


  Stone-diverse the street was, straight uplong the path led         320
  The warriors together. There shone the war-byrny
  The hard and the hand-lock'd; the ring-iron sheer
  Sang over their war-gear, when they to the hall first
  In their gear the all-fearful had gat them to ganging.
  So then the sea-weary their wide shields set down,
  Their war-rounds the mighty, against the hall's wall.
  Then bow'd they to bench, and rang there the byrnies,
  The war-weed of warriors, and up-stood the spears,
  The war-gear of the sea-folk all gather'd together.
  The ash-holt grey-headed; that host of the iron                    330
  With weapons was worshipful. There then a proud chief
  Of those lads of the battle speer'd after their line:
    Whence ferry ye then the shields golden-faced,
  The grey sarks therewith, and the helms all bevisor'd,
  And a heap of the war-shafts? Now am I of Hrothgar
  The man and the messenger: ne'er saw I of aliens
  So many of men more might-like of mood.
  I ween that for pride-sake, no wise for wrack-wending
  But for high might of mind, ye to Hrothgar have sought.
    Unto him then the heart-hardy answer'd and spake,                340
  The proud earl of the Weders the word gave aback,
  The hardy neath helm: Now of Hygelac are we
  The board-fellows; Beowulf e'en is my name,
  And word will I say unto Healfdene's son,
  To the mighty, the folk-lord, what errand is mine,
  Yea unto thy lord, if to us he will grant it
  That him, who so good is, anon we may greet.
    Spake Wulfgar the word, a lord of the Wendels,
  And the mood of his heart of a many was kenned,
  His war and his wisdom: I therefore the Danes' friend              350
  Will lightly be asking, of the lord of the Scyldings,
  The dealer of rings, since the boon thou art bidding,
  The mighty folk-lord, concerning thine errand,
  And swiftly the answer shall do thee to wit
  Which the good one to give thee aback may deem meetest.
    Then turn'd he in haste to where Hrothgar was sitting
  Right old and all hoary mid the host of his earl-folk:
  Went the valour-stark; stood he the shoulders before
  Of the Dane-lord: well could he the doughty ones' custom.
  So Wulfgar spake forth to his lord the well-friendly:              360
  Hither are ferry'd now, come from afar off
  O'er the field of the ocean, a folk of the Geats;
  These men of the battle e'en Beowulf name they
  Their elder and chiefest, and to thee are they bidding
  That they, O dear lord, with thee may be dealing
  In word against word. Now win them no naysay
  Of thy speech again-given, O Hrothgar the glad-man:
  For they in their war-gear, methinketh, be worthy
  Of good deeming of earls; and forsooth naught but doughty
  Is he who hath led o'er the warriors hither.                       370




  VII. BEOWULF SPEAKETH WITH HROTHGAR,
  AND TELLETH HOW HE WILL MEET GRENDEL.


  Word then gave out Hrothgar the helm of the Scyldings:
  I knew him in sooth when he was but a youngling,
  And his father, the old man, was Ecgtheow hight;
  Unto whom at his home gave Hrethel the Geat-lord
  His one only daughter; and now hath his offspring
  All hardy come hither a lief lord to seek him.
  For that word they spake then, the sea-faring men,
  E'en they who the gift-seat for the Geat-folk had ferry'd,
  Brought thither for thanks, that of thirty of menfolk
  The craft of might hath he within his own handgrip,                380
  That war-strong of men. Now him holy God
  For kind help hath sent off here even to us,
  We men of the West Danes, as now I have weening,
  'Gainst the terror of Grendel. So I to that good one
  For his mighty mood-daring shall the dear treasure bid.
  Haste now and be speedy, and bid them in straightway,
  The kindred-band gather'd together, to see us,
  And in words say thou eke that they be well comen
  To the folk of the Danes. To the door of the hall then
  Went Wulfgar, and words withinward he flitted:                     390
  He bade me to say you, my lord of fair battle,
  The elder of East-Danes, that he your blood knoweth,
  And that unto him are ye the sea-surges over,
  Ye lads hardy-hearted, well come to land hither;
  And now may ye wend you all in war-raiment
  Under the battle-mask Hrothgar to see.
  But here let your battle-boards yet be abiding,
  With your war-weed and slaughter-shafts, issue of words.
  Then rose up the rich one, much warriors around him,
  Chosen heap of the thanes, but there some abided                   400
  The war-gear to hold, as the wight one was bidding.
  Swift went they together, as the warrior there led them,
  Under Hart's roof: went the stout-hearted,
  The hardy neath helm, till he stood by the high-seat.
  Then Beowulf spake out, on him shone the byrny,
  His war-net besown by the wiles of the smith:
    Hail to thee, Hrothgar! I am of Hygelac
  Kinsman and folk-thane; fair deeds have I many
  Begun in my youth-tide, and this matter of Grendel
  On the turf of mine own land undarkly I knew.                      410
  'Tis the seafarers' say that standeth this hall,
  The best house forsooth, for each one of warriors
  All idle and useless, after the even-light
  Under the heaven-loft hidden becometh.
  Then lightly they learn'd me, my people, this lore,
  E'en the best that there be of the wise of the churls,
  O Hrothgar the kingly, that thee should I seek to,
  Whereas of the might of my craft were they cunning;
  For they saw me when came I from out of my wargear,
  Blood-stain'd from the foe whenas five had I bounden,              420
  Quell'd the kin of the eotens, and in the wave slain
  The nicors by night-tide: strait need then I bore,
  Wreak'd the grief of the Weders, the woe they had gotten;
  I ground down the wrathful; and now against Grendel
  I here with the dread one alone shall be dooming,
  In Thing with the giant. I now then with thee,
  O lord of the bright Danes, will fall to my bidding,
  O berg of Scyldings, and bid thee one boon,
  Which, O refuge of warriors, gainsay me not now,
  Since, O free friend of folks, from afar have I come,              430
  That I alone, I and my band of the earls,
  This hard heap of men, may cleanse Hart of ill.
  This eke have I heard say, that he, the fell monster,
  In his wan-heed recks nothing of weapons of war;
  Forgo I this therefore (if so be that Hygelac
  Will still be my man-lord, and he blithe of mood)
  To bear the sword with me, or bear the broad shield,
  Yellow-round to the battle; but with naught save the hand-grip
  With the foe shall I grapple, and grope for the life
  The loathly with loathly. There he shall believe                   440
  In the doom of the Lord whom death then shall take.
  Now ween I that he, if he may wield matters,
  E'en there in the war-hall the folk of the Geats
  Shall eat up unafear'd, as oft he hath done it
  With the might of the Hrethmen: no need for thee therefore
  My head to be hiding; for me will he have
  With gore all bestain'd, if the death of men get me;
  He will bear off my bloody corpse minded to taste it;
  Unmournfully then will the Lone-goer eat it,
  Will blood-mark the moor-ways; for the meat of my body             450
  Naught needest thou henceforth in any wise grieve thee.
  But send thou to Hygelac, if the war have me,
  The best of all war-shrouds that now my breast wardeth,
  The goodliest of railings, the good gift of Hrethel,
  The hand-work of Weland. Weird wends as she willeth.




  VIII. HROTHGAR ANSWERETH BEOWULF
  AND BIDDETH HIM SIT TO THE FEAST.


  Spake out then Hrothgar the helm of the Scyldings:
  Thou Beowulf, friend mine, for battle that wardeth
  And for help that is kindly hast sought to us hither.
  Fought down thy father the most of all feuds;
  To Heatholaf was he forsooth for a hand-bane                       460
  Amidst of the Wylfings. The folk of the Weders
  Him for the war-dread that while might not hold.
  So thence did he seek to the folk of the South-Danes
  O'er the waves' wallow, to the Scyldings be-worshipped.
  Then first was I wielding the weal of the Dane-folk,
  That time was I holding in youth-tide the gem-rich
  Hoard-burg of the heroes. Dead then was Heorogar,
  Mine elder of brethren; unliving was he,
  The Healfdene's bairn that was better than I.
  That feud then thereafter with fee did I settle;                   470
  I sent to the Wylfing folk over the waters' back
  Treasures of old time; he swore the oaths to me.
  Sorrow is in my mind that needs must I say it
  To any of grooms, of Grendel what hath he
  Of shaming in Hart, and he with his hate-wiles
  Of sudden harms framed; the host of my hall-floor,
  The war-heap, is waned; Weird swept them away
  Into horror of Grendel. It is God now that may lightly
  The scather the doltish from deeds thrust aside.
  Full oft have they boasted with beer well bedrunken,               480
  My men of the battle all over the ale-stoup,
  That they in the beer-hall would yet be abiding
  The onset of Grendel with the terror of edges.
  But then was this mead-hall in the tide of the morning,
  This warrior-hall, gore-stain'd when day at last gleamed,
  All the boards of the benches with blood besteam'd over,
  The hall laid with sword-gore: of lieges less had I
  Of dear and of doughty, for them death had gotten.
  Now sit thou to feast and unbind thy mood freely,
  Thy war-fame unto men as the mind of thee whetteth.                490
    Then was for the Geat-folk and them all together
  There in the beer-hall a bench bedight roomsome,
  There the stout-hearted hied them to sitting
  Proud in their might: a thane minded the service,
  Who in hand upbare an ale-stoup adorned,
  Skinked the sheer mead; whiles sang the shaper
  Clear out in Hart-hall; joy was of warriors,
  Men doughty no little of Danes and of Weders.




  IX. UNFERTH CONTENDETH IN WORDS WITH BEOWULF.


  Spake out then Unferth that bairn was of Ecglaf,
  And he sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings,               500
  He unbound the battle-rune; was Beowulf's faring,
  Of him the proud mere-farer, mickle unliking,
  Whereas he begrudg'd it of any man other
  That he glories more mighty the middle-garth over
  Should hold under heaven than he himself held:
    Art thou that Beowulf who won strife with Breca
  On the wide sea contending in swimming,
  When ye two for pride's sake search'd out the floods
  And for a dolt's cry into deep water
  Thrust both your life-days? No man the twain of you,               510
  Lief or loth were he, might lay wyte to stay you
  Your sorrowful journey, when on the sea row'd ye;
  Then when the ocean-stream ye with your arms deck'd,
  Meted the mere-streets, there your hands brandish'd!
  O'er the Spearman ye glided; the sea with waves welter'd,
  The surge of the winter. Ye twain in the waves' might
  For a seven nights swink'd. He outdid thee in swimming,
  And the more was his might; but him in the morn-tide
  To the Heatho-Remes' land the holm bore ashore.
  And thence away sought he to his dear land and lovely,             520
  The lief to his people sought the land of the Brondings,
  The fair burg peace-warding, where he the folk owned,
  The burg and the gold rings. What to theeward he boasted,
  Beanstan's son, for thee soothly he brought it about.
  Now ween I for thee things worser than erewhile,
  Though thou in the war-race wert everywhere doughty,
  In the grim war, if thou herein Grendel darest
  Night-long for a while of time nigh to abide.
    Then Beowulf spake out, the Ecgtheow's bairn:
  What! thou no few of things, O Unferth my friend,                  530
  And thou drunken with beer, about Breca hast spoken,
  Saidest out of his journey; so the sooth now I tell:
  To wit, that the more might ever I owned,
  Hard wearing on wave more than any man else.
  We twain then, we quoth it, while yet we were younglings,
  And we boasted between us, the twain of us being yet
  In our youth-days, that we out onto the Spearman
  Our lives would adventure; and e'en so we wrought It.
  We had a sword naked, when on the sound row'd we,
  Hard in hand, as we twain against the whale-fishes                 540
  Had mind to be warding us. No whit from me
  In the waves of the sea-flood afar might he float
  The hastier in holm, nor would I from him hie me.
  Then we two together, we were in the sea
  For a five nights, till us twain the flood drave asunder,
  The weltering of waves. Then the coldest of weathers
  In the dusking of night and the wind from the northward
  Battle-grim turn'd against us, rough grown were the billows.
  Of the mere-fishes then was the mood all up-stirred;
  There me 'gainst the loathly the body-sark mine,                   550
  The hard and the hand-lock'd, was framing me help,
  My battle-rail braided, it lay on my breast
  Gear'd graithly with gold. But me to the ground tugg'd
  A foe and fiend-scather; fast he had me In hold
  That grim one in grip: yet to me was it given.
  That the wretch there, the monster, with point might I reach,
  With my bill of the battle, and the war-race off bore
  The mighty mere-beast through the hand that was mine.




  X. BEOWULF MAKES AN END OF HIS TALE OF THE SWIMMING.
  WEALHTHEOW, HROTHGAR'S QUEEN, GREETS HIM;
  AND HROTHGAR DELIVERS TO HIM THE WARDING OF THE HALL.


  Thus oft and oft over the doers of evil
  They threatened me hard; thane-service I did them                  560
  With the dear sword of mine, as forsooth it was meet,
  That nowise of their fill did they win them the joy
  The evil fordoers in swallowing me down,
  Sitting round at the feast nigh the ground of the sea.
  Yea rather, a morning-tide, mangled by sword-edge
  Along the waves' leaving up there did they lie
  Lull'd asleep with the sword, so that never sithence
  About the deep floods for the farers o'er ocean
  The way have they letted. Came the light from the eastward,
  The bright beacon of God, and grew the seas calm,                  570
  So that the sea-nesses now might I look on,
  The windy walls. Thuswise Weird oft will be saving
  The earl that is unfey, when his valour availeth.
  Whatever, it happ'd me that I with the sword slew
  Nicors nine. Never heard I of fighting a night-tide
  'Neath the vault of the heavens was harder than that,
  Nor yet on the sea-streams of woefuller wight.
  Whatever, forth won I with life from the foes' clutch
  All of wayfaring weary. But me the sea upbore,
  The flood downlong the tide with the weltering of waters,          580
  All onto the Finnland. No whit of thee ever
  Mid such strife of the battle-gear have I heard say,
  Such terrors of bills. Nor never yet Breca
  In the play of the battle, nor both you, nor either,
  So dearly the deeds have framed forsooth
  With the bright flashing swords; though of this naught I boast me.
  But thou of thy brethren the banesman becamest,
  Yea thine head-kin forsooth, for which in hell shalt thou
  Dree weird of damnation, though doughty thy wit be;
  For unto thee say I forsooth, son of Ecglaf,                       590
  That so many deeds never Grendel had done,
  That monster the loathly, against thine own lord,
  The shaming in Hart-hall, if suchwise thy mind were,
  And thy soul e'en as battle-fierce, such as thou sayest.
  But he, he hath fram'd it that the feud he may heed not,
  The fearful edge-onset that is of thy folk,
  Nor sore need be fearful of the Victory-Scyldings.
  The need-pledges taketh he, no man he spareth
  Of the folk of the Danes, driveth war as he lusteth,
  Slayeth and feasteth unweening of strife                           600
  With them of the Spear-Danes. But I, I shall show it,
  The Geats' wightness and might ere the time weareth old,
  Shall bide him in war-tide. Then let him go who may go
  High-hearted to mead, sithence when the morn-light
  O'er the children of men of the second day hence,
  The sun clad in heaven's air, shines from the southward.
    Then merry of heart was the meter of treasures,
  The hoary-man'd war-renown'd, help now he trow'd in;
  The lord of the Bright-Danes on Beowulf hearken'd,
  The folk-shepherd knew him, his fast-ready mind.                   610
  There was laughter of heroes, and high the din rang
  And winsome the words were. Went Wealhtheow forth,
  The Queen she of Hrothgar, of courtesies mindful,
  The gold-array'd greeted the grooms in the hall,
  The free and frank woman the beaker there wended,
  And first to the East-Dane-folk's fatherland's warder,
  And bade him be blithe at the drinking of beer,
  To his people beloved, and lustily took he
  The feast and the hall-cup, that victory-fam'd King.
  Then round about went she, the Dame of the Helmings,               620
  And to doughty and youngsome, each deal of the folk there,
  Gave cups of the treasure, till now it betid
  That to Beowulf duly the Queen the ring-dighted,
  Of mind high uplifted, the mead-beaker bare.
  Then she greeted the Geat-lord, and gave God the thank,
  She, the wisefast In words, that the will had wax'd in her
  In one man of the earls to have trusting and troth
  For comfort from crimes. But the cup then he took,
  The slaughter-fierce warrior, from Wealhtheow the Queen.
  And then rim'd he the word, making ready for war,                  630
  And Beowulf spake forth, the Ecgtheow's bairn:
    E'en that in mind had I when up on holm strode I,
  And in sea-boat sat down with a band of my men,
  That for once and for all the will of your people
  Would I set me to work, or on slaughter-field cringe
  Fast in grip of the fiend; yea and now shall I frame
  The valour of earl-folk, or else be abiding
  The day of mine end, here down in the mead-hall.
    To the wife those his words well liking they were,
  The big word of the Geat; and the gold-adorn'd wended,             640
  The frank and free Queen to sit by her lord.
    And thereafter within the high hall was as erst
  The proud word outspoken and bliss on the people,
  Was the sound of the victory-folk, till on a sudden
  The Healfdene's son would now be a-seeking
  His rest of the even: wotted he for the Evil
  Within the high hall was the Hild-play bedight,
  Sithence that the sun-light no more should they see,
  When night should be darkening, and down over all
  The shapes of the shadow-helms should be a-striding                650
  Wan under the welkin. Uprose then all war-folk;
  Then greeted the glad-minded one man the other,
  Hrothgar to Beowulf, bidding him hail,
  And the wine-hall to wield, and withal quoth the word:
    Never to any man erst have I given,
  Since the hand and the shield's round aloft might I heave,
  This high hall of the Dane-folk, save now unto thee.
  Have now and hold the best of all houses,
  Mind thee of fame, show the might of thy valour!
  Wake the wroth one: no lack shall there be to thy willing          660
  If that wight work thou win and life therewithal.




  XI. NOW IS BEOWULF LEFT IN THE HALL ALONE WITH HIS MEN.


  Then wended him Hrothgar with the band of his warriors,
  The high-ward of the Scyldings from out of the hall,
  For then would the war-lord go seek unto Wealhtheow
  The Queen for a bed-mate. The glory of king-folk
  Against Grendel had set, as men have heard say,
  A hall-ward who held him a service apart
  In the house of the Dane-lord, for eoten-ward held he.
  Forsooth he, the Geat-lord, full gladly he trowed
  In the might of his mood and the grace of the Maker.               670
  Therewith he did off him his byrny of iron
  And the helm from his head, and his dighted sword gave,
  The best of all irons, to the thane that abode him,
  And bade him to hold that harness of battle.
  Bespake then the good one, a big word he gave out,
  Beowulf the Geat, ere on the bed strode he:
    Nowise in war I deem me more lowly
  In the works of the battle than Grendel, I ween;
  So not with the sword shall I lull him to slumber,
  Or take his life thuswise, though to me were it easy;              680
  Of that good wise he wots not, to get the stroke on me,
  To hew on my shield, for as stark as he shall be
  In the works of the foeman. So we twain a night-tide
  Shall forgo the sword, if he dare yet to seek
  The war without weapons. Sithence the wise God,
  The Lord that is holy, on which hand soever
  The glory may doom as due to him seemeth.
    Bowed down then the war-deer, the cheek-bolster took
  The face of the earl; and about him a many
  Of sea-warriors bold to their hall-slumber bow'd them;             690
  No one of them thought that thence away should he
  Seek ever again to his home the beloved,
  His folk or his free burg, where erst he was fed;
  For of men had they learn'd that o'er mickle a many
  In that wine-hall aforetime the fell death had gotten
  Of the folk of the Danes; but the Lord to them gave it,
  To the folk of the Weders, the web of war-speeding,
  Help fair and good comfort, e'en so that their foeman
  Through the craft of one man all they overcame,
  By the self-might of one. So is manifest truth                     700
  That God the Almighty the kindred of men
  Hath wielded wide ever. Now by wan night there came,
  There strode in the shade-goer; slept there the shooters,
  They who that horn-house should be a-holding,
  All men but one man: to men was that known,
  That them indeed might not, since will'd not the Maker,
  The scather unceasing drag off 'neath the shadow;
  But he ever watching in wrath 'gainst the wroth one
  Mood-swollen abided the battle-mote ever.




  XII. GRENDEL COMETH INTO HART:
  OF THE STRIFE BETWIXT HIM AND BEOWULF.


  Came then from the moor-land, all under the mist-bents,            710
  Grendel a-going there, bearing God's anger.
  The scather the ill one was minded of mankind
  To have one in his toils from the high hall aloft.
  'Neath the welkin he waded, to the place whence the wine-house,
  The gold-hall of men, most yarely he wist
  With gold-plates fair coloured; nor was it the first time
  That he unto Hrothgar's high home had betook him.
  Never he in his life-days, either erst or thereafter,
  Of warriors more hardy or hall-thanes had found.
  Came then to the house the wight on his ways,                      720
  Of all joys bereft; and soon sprang the door open,
  With fire-bands made fast, when with hand he had touch'd it;
  Brake the bale-heedy, he with wrath bollen,
  The mouth of the house there, and early thereafter
  On the shiny-fleck'd floor thereof trod forth the fiend;
  On went he then mood-wroth, and out from his eyes stood
  Likest to fire-flame light full unfair.
  In the high house beheld he a many of warriors,
  A host of men sib all sleeping together,
  Of man-warriors a heap; then laugh'd out his mood;                 730
  In mind deem'd he to sunder, or ever came day,
  The monster, the fell one, from each of the men there
  The life from the body; for befell him a boding
  Of fulfilment of feeding: but weird now it was not
  That he any more of mankind thenceforward
  Should eat, that night over. Huge evil beheld then
  The Hygelac's kinsman, and how the foul scather
  All with his fear-grips would fare there before him;
  How never the monster was minded to tarry,
  For speedily gat he, and at the first stour,                       740
  A warrior a-sleeping, and unaware slit him,
  Bit his bone-coffer, drank blood a-streaming,
  Great gobbets swallow'd in; thenceforth soon had he
  Of the unliving one every whit eaten
  To hands and feet even: then forth strode he nigher,
  And took hold with his hand upon him the highhearted.
  The warrior a-resting; reach'd out to himwards
  The fiend with his hand, gat fast on him rathely
  With thought of all evil, and besat him his arm.
  Then swiftly was finding the herdsman of fouldeeds                 750
  That forsooth he had met not in Middle-garth ever,
  In the parts of the earth, in any man else
  A hand-grip more mighty; then wax'd he of mood
  Heart-fearful, but none the more outward might he;
  Hence-eager his heart was to the darkness to hie him,
  And the devil-dray seek: not there was his service
  E'en such as he found in his life-days before.
  Then to heart laid the good one, the Hygelac's kinsman,
  His speech of the even-tide; uplong he stood
  And fast with him grappled, till bursted his fingers.              760
  The eoten was out-fain, but on strode the earl.
  The mighty fiend minded was, whereso he might,
  To wind him about more widely away thence,
  And flee fenwards; he found then the might of his fingers
  In the grip of the fierce one; sorry faring was that
  Which he, the harm-scather, had taken to Hart.
  The warrior-hall dinn'd now; unto all Danes there waxed,
  To the castle-abiders, to each of the keen ones,
  To all earls, as an ale-dearth. Now angry were both
  Of the fierce mighty warriors, far rang out the hall-house;        770
  Then mickle the wonder it was that the wine-hall
  Withstood the two war-deer, nor welter'd to earth
  The fair earthly dwelling; but all fast was it builded
  Within and without with the banding of iron
  By crafty thought smithy'd. But there from the sill bow'd
  Fell many a mead-bench, by hearsay of mine,
  With gold well adorned, where strove they the wrothful.
  Hereof never ween'd they, the wise of the Scyldings,
  That ever with might should any of men
  The excellent, bone-dight, break into pieces,                      780
  Or unlock with cunning, save the light fire's embracing
  In smoke should it swallow. So uprose the roar
  New and enough; now fell on the North-Danes
  Ill fear and the terror, on each and on all men,
  Of them who from wall-top hearken'd the weeping,
  Even God's foeman singing the fear-lay,
  The triumphless song, and the wound-bewailing
  Of the thrall of the Hell; for there now fast held him
  He who of men of main was the mightiest
  In that day which is told of, the day of this life.                790




  XIII. BEOWULF HATH THE VICTORY:
  GRENDEL IS HURT DEADLY
  AND LEAVETH HAND AND ARM IN THE HALL.


  Naught would the earls' help for anything thenceforth
  That murder-comer yet quick let loose of,
  Nor his life-days forsooth to any of folk
  Told he for useful. Out then drew full many
  Of Beowult's earls the heir-loom of old days,
  For their lord and their master's fair life would hey ward,
  That mighty of princes, if so might they do it.
  For this did they know not when they the strife dreed,
  Those hardy-minded men of the battle,
  And on every half there thought to be hewing,                      800
  And search out his soul, that the ceaseless scather
  Not any on earth of the choice of all irons,
  Not one of the war-bills, would greet home for ever.
  For he had forsworn him from victory-weapons,
  And each one of edges. But his sundering of soul
  In the days that we tell of, the day of this life,
  Should be weary and woeful, the ghost wending elsewhere
  To the wielding of fiends to wend him afar.
  Then found he out this, he who mickle erst made
  Out of mirth of his mood unto children of men                      810
  And had fram'd many crimes, he the foeman of God,
  That the body of him would not bide to avail him,
  But the hardy of mood, even Hygelac's kinsman,
  Had him fast by the hand: now was each to the other
  All loathly while living: his body-sore bided
  The monster: was manifest now on his shoulder
  The unceasing wound, sprang the sinews asunder,
  The bone-lockers bursted. To Beowulf now
  Was the battle-fame given; should Grendel thenceforth
  Flee life-sick awayward and under the fen-bents                    820
  Seek his unmerry stead: now wist he more surely
  That ended his life was, and gone over for ever,
  His day-tale told out. But was for all Dane-folk
  After that slaughter-race all their will done.
  Then had he cleans'd for them, he the far-comer,
  Wise and stout-hearted, the high hall of Hrothgar,
  And say'd it from war. So the night-work he joy'd in
  And his doughty deed done. Yea, but he for the East-Danes
  That lord of the Geat-folk his boast's end had gotten,
  Withal their woes bygone all had he booted,                        830
  And the sorrow hate-fashion'd that afore they had dreed,
  And the hard need and bitter that erst they must bear,
  The sorrow unlittle. Sithence was clear token
  When the deer of the battle laid down there the hand
  The arm and the shoulder, and all there together
  Of the grip of that Grendel 'neath the great roof upbuilded.




  XIV. THE DANES REJOICE;
  THEY GO TO LOOK ON THE SLOT OF GRENDEL,
  AND COME BACK TO HART, AND ON THE WAY MAKE MERRY
  WITH RACING AND THE TELLING OF TALES.


  There was then on the morning, as I have heard tell it,
  Round the gift-hall a many of men of the warriors:
  Were faring folk-leaders from far and from near
  O'er the wide-away roads the wonder to look on,                    840
  The track of the loathly: his life-sundering nowise
  Was deem'd for a sorrow to any of men there
  Who gaz'd on the track of the gloryless wight;
  How he all a-weary of mood thence awayward,
  Brought to naught in the battle, to the mere of the nicors,
  Now fey and forth-fleeing, his life-steps had flitted.
  There all in the blood was the sea-brim a-welling,
  The dread swing of the waves was washing all mingled
  With hot blood; with the gore of the sword was it welling;
  The death-doom'd had dyed it, sithence he unmerry                  850
  In his fen-hold had laid down the last of his life,
  His soul of the heathen, and hell gat hold on him.
    Thence back again far'd they those fellows of old,
  With many a young one, from their wayfaring merry,
  Full proud from the mere-side on mares there a-riding
  The warriors on white steeds. There then was of Beowulf
  Set forth the might mighty; oft quoth it a many
  That nor northward nor southward beside the twin sea-floods,
  Over all the huge earth's face now never another,
  Never under the heaven's breadth, was there a better,              860
  Nor of wielders of war-shields a worthier of kingship;
  But neither their friendly lord blam'd they one whit,
  Hrothgar the glad, for good of kings was he.
  There whiles the warriors far-famed let leap
  Their fair fallow horses and fare into flyting
  Where unto them the earth-ways for fair-fashion'd seemed,
  Through their choiceness well kenned; and whiles a king's thane,
  A warrior vaunt-laden, of lays grown bemindful,
  E'en he who all many of tales of the old days
  A multitude minded, found other words also                         870
  Sooth-bounden, and boldly the man thus began
  E'en Beowulf's wayfare well wisely to stir,
  With good speed to set forth the spells well areded
  And to shift about words. And well of all told he
  That he of Sigemund erst had heard say,
  Of the deeds of his might; and many things uncouth:
  Of the strife of the Wælsing and his wide wayfarings,
  Of those that men's children not well yet they wist,
  The feud and the crimes, save Fitela with him;
  Somewhat of such things yet would he say,                          880
  The eme to the nephew; e'en as they aye were
  In all strife soever fellows full needful;
  And full many had they of the kin of the eotens
  Laid low with the sword. And to Sigemund upsprang
  After his death-day fair doom unlittle
  Sithence that the war-hard the Worm there had quelled,
  The herd of the hoard; he under the hoar stone,
  The bairn of the Atheling, all alone dar'd it,
  That wight deed of deeds; with him Fitela was not.
  But howe'er, his hap was that the sword so through-waded           890
  The Worm the all-wondrous, that in the wall stood
  The iron dear-wrought: and the drake died the murder.
  There had the warrior so won by wightness,
  That he of the ring-hoard the use might be having
  All at his own will. The sea-boat he loaded,
  And into the ship's barm bore the bright fretwork
  Wæls' son. In the hotness the Worm was to-molten.
  Now he of all wanderers was widely the greatest
  Through the peoples of man-kind, the warder of warriors,
  By mighty deeds; erst then and early he throve.                    900
  Now sithence the warfare of Heremod waned,
  His might and his valour, amidst of the eotens
  To the wielding of foemen straight was he betrayed,
  And speedily sent forth: by the surges of sorrow
  O'er-long was he lam'd, became he to his lieges,
  To all of the athelings, a life-care thenceforward.
  Withal oft bemoaned in times that were older
  The ways of that stout heart many a carle of the wisest.
  Who trow'd in him boldly for booting of bales,
  And had look'd that the king's bairn should ever be thriving,      910
  His father's own lordship should take, hold the folk,
  The hoard and the ward-burg, and realm of the heroes,
  The own land of the Scyldings. To all men was Beowulf,
  The Hygelac's kinsman to the kindred of menfolk,
  More fair unto friends; but on Heremod crime fell.
  So whiles the men flyting the fallow street there
  With their mares were they meting. There then was the morn-light
  Thrust forth and hasten'd; went many a warrior
  All hardy of heart to the high hall aloft
  The rare wonder to see; and the King's self withal                 920
  From the bride-bower wended, the warder of ring-hoards,
  All glorious he trod and a mickle troop had he,
  He for choice ways beknown; and his Queen therewithal
  Meted the mead-path with a meyny of maidens.




  XV. KING HROTHGAR AND HIS THANES
  LOOK ON THE ARM OF GRENDEL.
  CONVERSE BETWIXT HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF
  CONCERNING THE BATTLE.


  Out then spake Hrothgar; for he to the hall went,
  By the staple a-standing the steep roof he saw
  Shining fair with the gold, and the hand there of Grendel:
    For this sight that I see to the All-wielder thanks
  Befall now forthwith, for foul evil I bided,
  All griefs from this Grendel; but God, glory's Herder,             930
  Wonder on wonder ever can work.
  Unyore was it then when I for myself
  Might ween never more, wide all through my life-days,
  Of the booting of woes; when all blood-besprinkled
  The best of all houses stood sword-gory here;
  Wide then had the woe thrust off each of the wise
  Of them that were looking that never life-long
  That land-work of the folk they might ward from the loathly,
  From ill wights and devils. But now hath a warrior
  Through the might of the Lord a deed made thereunto                940
  Which we, and all we together, in nowise
  By wisdom might work. What! well might be saying
  That maid whosoever this son brought to birth
  According to man's kind, if yet she be living,
  That the Maker of old time to her was all-gracious
  In the bearing of bairns. O Beowulf, I now
  Thee best of all men as a son unto me
  Will love in my heart, and hold thou henceforward
  Our kinship new-made now; nor to thee shall be lacking
  As to longings of world-goods whereof I have wielding;             950
  Full oft I for lesser things guerdon have given,
  The worship of hoards, to a warrior was weaker,
  A worser in strife. Now thyself for thyself
  By deeds hast thou fram'd it that liveth thy fair fame
  For ever and ever. So may the All-wielder
  With good pay thee ever, as erst he hath done it.
    Then Beowulf spake out, the Ecgtheow's bairn:
  That work of much might with mickle of love
  We framed with fighting, and frowardly ventur'd
  The might of the uncouth; now I would that rather                  960
  Thou mightest have look'd on the very man there,
  The foe in his fret-gear all worn unto falling.
  There him in all haste with hard griping did I
  On the slaughter-bed deem it to bind him indeed,
  That he for my hand-grip should have to be lying
  All busy for life: but his body fled off.
  Him then, I might not (since would not the Maker)
  From his wayfaring sunder, nor naught so well sought I
  The life-foe; o'er-mickle of might was he yet,
  The foeman afoot: but his hand has he left us,                     970
  A life-ward, a-warding the ways of his wending,
  His arm and his shoulder therewith. Yet in nowise
  That wretch of the grooms any solace hath got him,
  Nor longer will live the loathly deed-doer,
  Beswinked with sins; for the sore hath him now
  In the grip of need grievous, in strait hold togather'd
  With bonds that be baleful: there shall he abide,
  That wight dyed with all evil-deeds, the doom mickle,
  For what wise to him the bright Maker will write it.
    Then a silenter man was the son there of Ecglaf                  980
  In the speech of the boasting of works of the battle,
  After when every atheling by craft of the earl
  Over the high roof had look'd on the hand there,
  Yea, the fiend's fingers before his own eyen,
  Each one of the nail-steads most like unto steel,
  Hand-spur of the heathen one; yea, the own claw
  Uncouth of the war-wight. But each one there quoth it,
  That no iron of the best, of the hardy of folk,
  Would touch him at all, which e'er of the monster
  The battle-hand bloody might bear away thence.                     990




  XVI. HROTHGAR GIVETH GIFTS TO BEOWULF.


  Then was speedily bidden that Hart be withinward
  By hand of man well adorn'd; was there a many
  Of warriors and wives, who straightway that wine-house
  The guest-house, bedight them: there gold-shotten shone
  The webs over the walls, many wonders to look on
  For men every one who on such things will stare.
    Was that building the bright all broken about
  All withinward, though fast in the bands of the iron;
  Asunder the hinges rent, only the roof there
  Was saved all sound, when the monster of evil                     1000
  The guilty of crime-deeds had gat him to flight
  Never hoping for life. Nay, lightly now may not
  That matter be fled from, frame it whoso may frame it.
  But by strife man shall win of the bearers of souls,
  Of the children of men, compelled by need,
  The abiders on earth, the place made all ready,
  The stead where his body laid fast on his death-bed
  Shall sleep after feast. Now time and place was it
  When unto the hall went that Healfdene's son,
  And the King himself therein the feast should be sharing;         1010
  Never heard I of men-folk in fellowship more
  About their wealth-giver so well themselves bearing.
  Then bow'd unto bench there the abounders in riches
  And were fain of their fill. Full fairly there took
  A many of mead-cups the kin of those men,
  The sturdy of heart in the hall high aloft,
  Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Hart there withinward
  Of friends was fulfilled; naught there that was guilesome
  The folk of the Scyldings for yet awhile framed.
    Gave then to Beowulf Healfdene's bairn                          1020
  A golden war-ensign, the victory's guerdon,
  A staff-banner fair-dight, a helm and a byrny:
  The great jewel-sword a many men saw them
  Bear forth to the hero. Then Beowulf took
  The cup on the floor, and nowise of that fee-gift
  Before the shaft-shooters the shame need he have.
  Never heard I how friendlier four of the treasures,
  All gear'd with the gold about, many men erewhile
  On the ale-bench have given to others of men.
  Round the roof of the helm, the burg of the head,                 1030
  A wale wound with wires held ward from without-ward,
  So that the file-leavings might not over fiercely,
  Were they never so shower-hard, scathe the shield-bold,
  When he 'gainst the angry in anger should get him.
  Therewith bade the earls' burg that eight of the horses
  With cheek-plates adorned be led down the floor
  In under the fences; on one thereof stood
  A saddle all craft-bedeck'd, seemly with treasure.
  That same was the war-seat of the high King full surely
  Whenas that the sword-play that Healfdene's son                   1040
  Would work; never failed in front of the war
  The wide-kenn'd one's war-might, whereas fell the slain.
    So to Beowulf thereon of either of both
  The Ingwines' high warder gave wielding to have,
  Both the war-steeds and weapons, and bade him well brook them.
  Thuswise and so manly the mighty of princes,
  Hoard-warden of heroes, the battle-race paid
  With mares and with gems, so as no man shall blame them,
  E'en he who will say sooth aright as it is.




  XVII. THEY FEAST IN HART.
  THE GLEEMAN SINGS OF FINN AND HENGEST.


  Then the lord of the earl-folk to every and each one              1050
  Of them who with Beowulf the sea-ways had worn
  Then and there on the mead-bench did handsel them treasure,
  An heir-loom to wit; for him also he bade it
  That a were-gild be paid, whom Grendel aforetime
  By wickedness quell'd, as far more of them would he,
  Save from them God all-witting the weird away wended,
  And that man's mood withal. But the Maker all wielded
  Of the kindred of mankind, as yet now he doeth.
  Therefore through-witting will be the best everywhere
  And the forethought of mind. Many things must abide               1060
  Of lief and of loth, he who here a long while
  In these days of the strife with the world shall be dealing.
    There song was and sound all gather'd together
  Of that Healfdene's warrior and wielder of battle,
  The wood of glee greeted, the lay wreaked often,
  Whenas the hall-game the minstrel of Hrothgar
  All down by the mead-bench tale must be making:
    By Finn's sons aforetime, when the fear gat them,
  The hero of Half-Danes, Hnaef of the Scyldings,
  On the slaughter-field Frisian needs must he fall.                1070
  Forsooth never Hildeburh needed to hery
  The troth of the Eotens; she all unsinning
  Was lorne of her lief ones in that play of the linden,
  Her bairns and her brethren, by fate there they fell
  Spear-wounded. That was the all-woeful of women.
  Not unduly without cause the daughter of Hoc
  Mourn'd the Maker's own shaping, sithence came the morn
  When she under the heavens that tide came to see,
  Murder-bale of her kinsmen, where most had she erewhile?
  Of world's bliss. The war-tide took all men away                  1080
  Of Finn's thanes that were, save only a few;
  E'en so that he might not on the field of the meeting
  Hold Hengest a war-tide, or fight any whit,
  Nor yet snatch away thence by war the woe-leavings
  From the thane of the King; but terms now they bade him
  That for them other stead all for all should make room,
  A hall and high settle, whereof the half-wielding
  They with the Eotens' bairns henceforth might hold,
  And with fee-gifts moreover the son of Folkwalda
  Each day of the days the Danes should beworthy;                   1090
  The war-heap of Hengest with rings should he honour
  Even so greatly with treasure of treasures,
  Of gold all beplated, as he the kin Frisian
  Down in the beer-hall duly should dight.
  Troth then they struck there each of the two halves,
  A peace-troth full fast. There Finn unto Hengest
  Strongly, unstrifeful, with oath-swearing swore,
  That he the woe-leaving by the doom of the wise ones
  Should hold in ail honour, that never man henceforth
  With word or with work the troth should be breaking,              1100
  Nor through craft of the guileful should undo it ever,
  Though their ring-giver's bane they must follow in rank
  All lordless, e'en so need is it to be:
  But if any of Frisians by over-bold speaking
  The murderful hatred should call unto mind,
  Then naught but the edge of the sword should avenge it.
  Then done was the oath there, and gold of the golden
  Heav'd up from the hoard. Of the bold Here-Scyldings
  All yare on the bale was the best battle-warrior;
  On the death-howe beholden was easily there                       1110
  The sark stain'd with war-sweat, the all-golden swine,
  The iron-hard boar; there was many an atheling
  With wounds all outworn; some on slaughter-field welter'd.
  But Hildeburh therewith on Hnæf's bale she bade them
  The own son of herself to set fast in the flame,
  His bone-vats to burn up and lay on the bale there:
  On his shoulder all woeful the woman lamented,
  Sang songs of bewailing, as the warrior strode upward,
  Wound up to the welkin that most of death-fires,
  Before the howe howled; there molten the heads were,              1120
  The wound-gates burst open, there blood was out-springing
  From foe-bites of the body; the flame swallow'd all,
  The greediest of ghosts, of them that war gat him
  Of either of folks; shaken off was their life-breath.




  XVIII. THE ENDING OF THE TALE OF FINN.


  Departed the warriors their wicks to visit
  All forlorn of their friends now, Friesland to look on,
  Their homes and their high burg. Hengest a while yet
  Through the slaughter-dyed winter bode dwelling with Finn
  And all without strife: he remember'd his homeland,
  Though never he might o'er the mere be a-driving                  1130
  The high prow be-ringed: with storm the holm welter'd,
  Won war 'gainst the winds; winter locked the waves
  With bondage of ice, till again came another
  Of years into the garth, as yet it is ever,
  And the days which the season to watch never cease,
  The glory-bright weather; then gone was the winter,
  And fair was the earth's barm. Now hastened the exile.
  The guest from the garths; he on getting of vengeance
  Of harms thought more greatly than of the sea's highway,
  If he but a wrath-mote might yet be a-wending                     1140
  Where the bairns of the Eotens might he still remember.
  The ways of the world forwent he in nowise
  Then, whenas Hunlafing the light of the battle,
  The best of all bills, did into his breast,
  Whereof mid the Eotens were the edges well knowen.
  Withal to the bold-hearted Finn befell after
  Sword-bales the deadly at his very own dwelling,
  When the grim grip of war Guthlaf and Oslaf
  After the sea-fare lamented with sorrow
  And wyted him deal of their woes; nor then might he               1150
  In his breast hold his wavering heart. Was the hall dight
  With the lives of slain foemen, and slain eke was Finn
  The King 'midst of his court-men; and there the Queen, taken,
  The shooters of the Scyldings ferry'd down to the sea-ships,
  And the house-wares and chattels the earth-king had had,
  E'en such as at Finn's home there might they find,
  Of collars and cunning gems. They on the sea-path
  The all-lordly wife to the Danes straightly wended,
  Led her home to their people. So sung was the lay,
  The song of the gleeman; then again arose game,                   1160
  The bench-voice wax'd brighter, gave forth the birlers
  Wine of the wonder-vats. Then came forth Wealhtheow
  Under gold ring a-going to where sat the two good ones,
  The uncle and nephew, yet of kindred unsunder'd,
  Each true to the other. Eke Unferth the spokesman
  Sat at feet of the Scyldings' lord; each of his heart trow'd
  That of mickle mood was he, though he to his kinsmen
  Were un-upright in edge-play. Spake the dame of the Scyldings:
    Now take thou this cup, my lord of the kingly,
  Bestower of treasures! Be thou in thy joyance,                    1170
  Thou gold-friend of men! and speak to these Geat-folk
  In mild words, as duly behoveth to do;
  Be glad toward the Geat-folk, and mindful of gifts;
  From anigh and from far peace hast thou as now.
  To me one hath said it, that thou for a son wouldst
  This warrior be holding. Lo! Hart now is cleansed,
  The ring-hall bright-beaming. Have joy while thou mayest
  In many a meed, and unto thy kinsmen
  Leave folk and dominion, when forth thou must fare
  To look on the Maker's own making. I know now                     1180
  My Hrothulf the gladsome, that he this young man
  Will hold in all honour if thou now before him,
  O friend of the Scyldings, shall fare from the world;
  I ween that good-will yet this man will be yielding
  To our offspring that after us be, if he mind him
  Of all that which we two, for good-will and for worship,
  Unto him erst a child yet have framed of kindness.
    Then along by the bench did she turn, where her boys were,
  Hrethric and Hrothmund, and the bairns of high warriors,
  The young ones together; and there sat the good one,              1190
  Beowulf the Geat, betwixt the two brethren.




  XIX. MORE GIFTS ARE GIVEN TO BEOWULF.
  THE BRISING COLLAR TOLD OF.


  Borne to him then the cup was, and therewith friendly bidding
  In words was put forth; and gold about wounden
  All blithely they bade him bear; arm-gearings twain,
  Rail and rings, the most greatest of fashion of neck-rings
  Of them that on earth I have ever heard tell of:
  Not one under heaven wrought better was heard of
  Midst the hoard-gems of heroes, since bore away Hama
  To the bright burg and brave the neck-gear of the Brisings,
  The gem and the gem-chest: from the foeman's guile fled he        1200
  Of Eormenric then, and chose rede everlasting.
  That ring Hygelac had, e'en he of the Geat-folk,
  The grandson of Swerting, the last time of all times
  When he under the war-sign his treasure defended,
  The slaughter-prey warded. Him weird bore away
  Sithence he for pride-sake the war-woe abided,
  The feud with the Frisians; the fretwork he flitted,
  The gem-stones much worthy, all over the waves' cup.
  The King the full mighty cring'd under the shield;
  Into grasp of the Franks the King's life was gotten               1210
  With the gear of the breast and the ring altogether;
  It was worser war-wolves then reft gear from the slain
  After the war-shearing; there the Geats' war-folk
  Held the house of the dead men. The Hall took the voices;
  Spake out then Wealhtheow; before the host said she:
    Brook thou this roundel, lief Beowulf, henceforth,
  Dear youth, with all hail, and this rail be thou using,
  These gems of folk-treasures, and thrive thou well ever;
  Thy might then make manifest! Be to these lads here
  Kind of lore, and for that will I look to thy guerdon.            1220
  Thou hast won by thy faring, that far and near henceforth,
  Through wide time to come, men will give thee the worship,
  As widely as ever the sea winds about
  The windy land-walls. Be the while thou art living
  An atheling wealthy, and well do I will thee
  Of good of the treasures; be thou to my son
  In deed ever friendly, and uphold thy joyance!
  Lo! each of the earls here to the other is trusty,
  And mild of his mood and to man-lord full faithful,
  Kind friends all the thanes are, the folk ever yare.              1230
  Ye well drunk of folk-grooms, now do ye my biddings.
    To her settle then far'd she; was the feast of the choicest,
  The men drank the wine nothing wotting of weird,
  The grim shaping of old, e'en as forth it had gone
  To a many of earls; sithence came the even,
  And Hrothgar departed to his chamber on high,
  The rich to his rest; and aright the house warded
  Earls untold of number, as oft did they erewhile.
  The bench-boards they bar'd them, and there they spread over
  With beds and with bolsters. Of the beer-skinkers one             1240
  Who fain was and fey bow'd adown to his floor-rest.
  At their heads then they rested their rounds of the battle,
  Their board-woods bright-shining. There on the bench was,
  Over the atheling, easy to look on
  The battle-steep war-helm, the byrny be-ringed,
  The wood of the onset, all-glorious. Their wont was
  That oft and oft were they all yare for the war-tide,
  Both at home and in hosting, were it one were it either,
  And for every such tide as their liege lord unto
  The need were befallen: right good was that folk.                 1250




  XX. GRENDEL'S DAM BREAKS INTO HART
  AND BEARS OFF AESCHERE.


  So sank they to slumber; but one paid full sorely
  For his rest of the even, as to them fell full often
  Sithence that the gold-hall Grendel had guarded,
  And won deed of unright, until that the end came
  And death after sinning: but clear was it shown now,
  Wide wotted of men, that e'en yet was a wreaker
  Living after the loathly, a long while of time
  After the battle-care, Grendel's own mother;
  The woman, the monster-wife, minded her woe,
  She who needs must in horror of waters be wonning,                1260
  The streams all a-cold, sithence Cain was become
  For an edge-bane forsooth to his very own brother,
  The own son of his father. Forth bann'd then he fared,
  All marked by murder, from man's joy to flee,
  And dwelt in the waste-land. Thence woke there a many
  Ghosts shapen of old time, of whom one was Grendel,
  The fierce wolf, the hateful, who found him at Hart
  A man there a-watching, abiding the war-tide;
  Where to him the fell ogre to hand-grips befell;
  Howe'er he him minded of the strength of his might,               1270
  The great gift set fast in him given of God,
  And trowed in grace by the All-wielder given,
  His fostering, his staying; so the fiend he o'ercame
  And bow'd down the Hell's ghost, that all humble he wended
  Fordone of all mirth death's house to go look on,
  That fiend of all mankind. But yet was his mother,
  The greedy, the glum-moody, fain to be going
  A sorrowful journey her son's death to wreak.
    So came she to Hart whereas now the Ring-Danes
  Were sleeping adown the hall; soon there befell                   1280
  Change of days to the earl-folk, when in she came thrusting,
  Grendel's mother: and soothly was minish'd the terror
  By even so much as the craft-work of maidens,
  The war-terror of wife, is beside the man weapon'd,
  When the sword all hard bounden, by hammers to-beaten,
  The sword all sweat-stain'd, through the swine o'er the war-helm
  With edges full doughty down rightly sheareth.
    But therewith in the hall was tugg'd out the hard edge,
  The sword o'er the settles, and wide shields a many
  Heaved fast in the hand: no one the helm heeded,                  1290
  Nor the byrny wide-wrought, when the wild fear fell on them.
  In haste was she then, and out would she thenceforth
  For the saving her life, whenas she should be found there.
  But one of the athelings she speedily handled
  And caught up full fast, and fenward so fared.
  But he was unto Hrothgar the liefest of heroes
  Of the sort of the fellows; betwixt the two sea-floods
  A mighty shield-warrior, whom she at rest brake up,
  A war-wight well famed. There Beowulf was not;
  Another house soothly had erewhile been dighted                   1300
  After gift of that treasure to that great one of Geats.
    Uprose cry then in Hart, all 'mid gore had she taken
  The hand, the well-known, and now care wrought anew
  In the wicks was arisen. Naught well was the bargain
  That on both halves they needs must be buying that tide
  With the life-days of friends. Then the lord king, the wise,
  The hoary of war-folk, was harmed of mood
  When his elder of thanes and he now unliving,
  The dearest of all, he knew to be dead.
  To the bower full swiftly was Beowulf brought now,                1310
  The man victory-dower'd; together with day-dawn
  Went he, one of the earls, that champion beworthy'd,
  Himself with his fellows, where the wise was abiding
  To wot if the All-wielder ever will to him
  After the tale of woe happy change work.
  Then went down the floor he the war-worthy
  With the host of his hand, while high dinn'd the hall-wood,
  Till he there the wise one with words had well greeted,
  The lord of the Ingwines, and ask'd had the night been.
  Since sore he was summon'd, a night of sweet easement.            1320




  XXI. HROTHGAR LAMENTS THE SLAYING OF AESCHERE,
  AND TELLS OF GRENDEL'S MOTHER AND HER DEN.


  Spake out then Hrothgar the helm of the Scyldings:
  Ask no more after bliss; for new-made now is sorrow
  For the folk of the Danes; for Aeschere is dead,
  He who was Yrmenlaf's elder of brethren,
  My wise man of runes, my bearer of redes,
  Mine own shoulder-fellow, when we in the war-tide
  Warded our heads and the host on the host fell,
  And the boars were a-crashing; e'en such should an earl be,
  An atheling exceeding good, e'en as was Aeschere.
  Now in Hart hath befallen for a hand-bane unto him                1330
  A slaughter-ghost wandering; naught wot I whither
  The fell one, the carrion-proud, far'd hath her back-fare,
  By her fill made all famous. That feud hath she wreaked
  Wherein yesternight gone by Grendel thou quelledst
  Through thy hardihood fierce with grips hard enow.
  For that he over-long the lief people of me
  Made to wane and undid. In the war then he cringed,
  Being forfeit of life. But now came another,
  An ill-scather mighty, her son to awreak;
  And further hath she now the feud set on foot,                    1340
  As may well be deemed of many a thane,
  Who after the wealth-giver weepeth in mind,
  A hard bale of heart. Now the hand lieth low
  Which well-nigh for every joy once did avail you.
    The dwellers in land here, my people indeed,
  The wise-of-rede hall-folk, have I heard say e'en this:
  That they have set eyes on two such-like erewhile,
  Two mickle mark-striders the moorland a-holding,
  Ghosts come from elsewhere, but of them one there was,
  As full certainly might they then know it to be,                  1350
  In the likeness of woman; and the other shap'd loathly
  All after man's image trod the tracks of the exile,
  Save that more was he shapen than any man other;
  And in days gone away now they named him Grendel,
  The dwellers in fold; they wot not if a father
  Unto him was born ever in the days of erewhile
  Of dark ghosts. They dwell in a dim hidden land,
  The wolf-bents they bide in, on the nesses the windy,
  The perilous fen-paths where the stream of the fell-side
  Midst the mists of the nesses wends netherward ever,              1360
  The flood under earth. Naught far away hence,
  But a mile-mark forsooth, there standeth the mere,
  And over it ever hang groves all berimed,
  The wood fast by the roots over-helmeth the water.
  But each night may one a dread wonder there see,
  A fire in the flood. But none liveth so wise
  Of the bairns of mankind, that the bottom may know.
  Although the heath-stepper beswinked by hounds,
  The hart strong of horns, that holt-wood should seek to
  Driven fleeing from far, he shall sooner leave life,              1370
  Leave life-breath on the bank, or ever will he
  Therein hide his head. No hallow'd stead is it:
  Thence the blending of water-waves ever upriseth
  Wan up to the welkin, whenso the wind stirreth
  Weather-storms loathly, until the lift darkens
  And weepeth the heavens. Now along the rede wendeth
  Of thee again only. Of that earth yet thou know'st not,
  The fearful of steads, wherein thou mayst find
  That much-sinning wight; seek then if thou dare,
  And thee for that feud will I guerdon with fee,                   1380
  The treasures of old time, as erst did I do,
  With the gold all-bewounden, if away thence thou get thee.




  XXII. THEY FOLLOW GRENDEL'S DAM TO HER LAIR.


  Spake out then Beowulf the Ecgtheow's bairn:
  O wise of men, mourn not; for to each man 'tis better
  That his friend he awreak than weep overmuch.
  Lo! each of us soothly abideth the ending
  Of the life of the world. Then let him work who work may
  High deeds ere the death: to the doughty of war-lads
  When he is unliving shall it best be hereafter.
  Rise up, warder of kingdom! and swiftly now wend we               1390
  The Grendel Kinswoman's late goings to look on;
  And this I behote thee, that to holm shall she flee not,
  Nor into earth's fathom, nor into the fell-holt,
  Nor the grounds of the ocean, go whereas she will go.
  For this one of days patience dree thou a while then
  Of each one of thy woes, as I ween it of thee.
    Then leapt up the old man, and lightly gave God thank,
  That mighty of Lords, for the word which the man spake.
  And for Hrothgar straightway then was bitted a horse,
  A wave-maned steed: and the wise of the princes                   1400
  Went stately his ways; and stepp'd out the man-troop,
  The linden-board bearers. Now lightly the tracks were
  All through the woodland ways wide to be seen there,
  Her goings o'er ground; she had gotten her forthright
  Over the mirk-moor: bore she of kindred thanes
  The best that there was, all bare of his soul,
  Of them that with Hrothgar heeded the home.
  Overwent then that bairn of the athelings
  Steep bents of the stones, and stridings full narrow,
  Strait paths nothing pass'd over, ways all uncouth,               1410
  Sheer nesses to wit, many houses of nicors.
    He one of the few was going before
  Of the wise of the men the meadow to look on,
  Until suddenly there the trees of the mountains
  Over the hoar-stone found he a-leaning,
  A wood without gladness: the water stood under
  Dreary and troubled. Unto all the Danes was it,
  To the friends of the Scyldings, most grievous in mood
  To many of thanes such a thing to be tholing,
  Sore evil to each one of earls, for of Aeschere                   1420
  The head did they find e'en there on the holm-cliff;
  The flood with gore welled (the folk looking on it),
  With hot blood. But whiles then the horn fell to singing
  A song of war eager. There sat down the band;
  They saw down the water a many of worm-kind,
  Sea-drakes seldom seen a-kenning the sound;
  Likewise on the ness-bents nicors a-lying,
  Who oft on the undern-tide wont are to hold them
  A course full of sorrow all over the sail-road.
  Now the worms and the wild-deer away did they speed               1430
  Bitter and wrath-swollen all as they heard it,
  The war-horn a-wailing: but one the Geats' warden
  With his bow of the shafts from his life-days there sunder'd,
  From his strife of the waves; so that stood in his life-parts
  The hard arrow of war; and he in the holm was
  The slower in swimming as death away swept him.
  So swiftly in sea-waves with boar-spears forsooth
  Sharp-hook'd and hard-press'd was he thereupon,
  Set on with fierce battle, and on to the ness tugg'd,
  The wondrous wave-bearer; and men were beholding                  1440
  The grisly guest, Beowulf therewith he gear'd him
  With weed of the earls: nowise of life reck'd he:
  Needs must his war-byrny, braided by hands,
  Wide, many-colour'd by cunning, the sound seek,
  E'en that which his bone-coffer knew how to ward,
  So that the war-grip his heart ne'er a while,
  The foe-snatch of the wrathful his life ne'er should scathe;
  Therewith the white war-helm warded his head,
  E'en that which should mingle with ground of the mere,
  And seek the sound-welter, with treasure beworthy'd,              1450
  All girt with the lordly chains, as in days gone by
  The weapon-smith wrought it most wondrously done,
  Beset with the swine-shapes, so that sithence
  The brand or the battle-blades never might bite it.
  Nor forsooth was that littlest of all of his mainstays,
  Which to him in his need lent the spokesman of Hrothgar,
  E'en the battle-sword hafted that had to name Hrunting,
  That in fore days was one of the treasures of old,
  The edges of iron with the poison twigs o'er-stain'd,
  With battle-sweat harden'd; in the brunt never fail'd he          1460
  Any one of the warriors whose hand wound about him,
  Who in grisly wayfarings durst ever to wend him
  To the folk-stead of foemen. Not the first of times was it
  That battle-work doughty it had to be doing.
  Forsooth naught remember'd that son there of Ecglaf,
  The crafty in mighty deeds, what ere he quoth
  All drunken with wine, when the weapon he lent
  To a doughtier sword-wolf: himself naught he durst it
  Under war of the waves there his life to adventure
  And warrior-ship work. So forwent he the glory,                   1470
  The fair fame of valour. Naught far'd so the other
  Syth he to the war-tide had gear'd him to wend.




  XXIII. BEOWULF REACHETH THE MERE-BOTTOM IN A DAY'S WHILE,
  AND CONTENDS WITH GRENDEL'S DAM.


  Out then spake Beowulf, Ecgtheow's bairn:
  Forsooth be thou mindful, O great son of Healfdene,
  O praise of the princes, now way-fain am I,
  O gold-friend of men, what we twain spake aforetime:
  If to me for thy need it might so befall
  That I cease from my life-days, thou shouldest be ever
  To me, forth away wended, in the stead of a father.
  Do thou then bear in hand these thanes of my kindred,             1480
  My hand-fellows, if so be battle shall have me;
  Those same treasures withal, which thou gavest me erst,
  O Hrothgar the lief, unto Hygelac send thou;
  By that gold then shall wot the lord of the Geat-folk,
  Shall Hrethel's son see, when he stares on the treasure,
  That I in fair man-deeds a good one have found me,
  A ring-giver; while I might, joy made I thereof.
  And let thou then Unferth the ancient loom have,
  The wave-sword adorned, that man kenned widely,
  The blade of hard edges; for I now with Hrunting                  1490
  Will work me the glory, or else shall death get me.
    So after these words the Weder-Geats' chieftain
  With might of heart hasten'd; nor for answer then would he
  Aught tarry; the sea-welter straightway took hold on
  The warrior of men: wore the while of a daytide
  Or ever the ground-plain might he set eyes on.
    Soon did she find, she who the flood-ring
  Sword-ravening had held for an hundred of seasons,
  Greedy and grim, that there one man of grooms
  The abode of the alien-wights sought from above;                  1500
  Then toward him she grasp'd and gat hold on the warrior
  With fell clutch, but no sooner she scathed withinward
  The hale body; rings from without-ward it warded,
  That she could in no wise the war-skin clutch through,
  The fast locked limb-sark, with fingers all loathly.
  So bare then that sea-wolf when she came unto bottom
  The king of the rings to the court-hall adown
  In such wise that he might not, though hard-moody was he,
  Be wielding of weapons. But a many of wonders
  In sea-swimming swink'd him, and many a sea-deer                  1510
  With his war-tusks was breaking his sark of the battle;
  The fell wights him follow'd. 'Twas then the earl found it
  That in foe-hall there was he, I wot not of which,
  Where never the water might scathe him a whit,
  Nor because of the roof-hall might reach to him there
  The fear-grip of the flood. Now fire-light he saw,
  The bleak beam forsooth all brightly a-shining.
  Then the good one, he saw the wolf of the ground,
  The mere-wife the mighty, and main onset made he
  With his battle-bill; never his hand withheld sword-swing         1520
  So that there on her head sang the ring-sword forsooth
  The song of war greedy. But then found the guest
  That the beam of the battle would bite not therewith,
  Or scathe life at all, but there failed the edge
  The king in his need. It had ere thol'd a many
  Of meetings of hand; oft it sheared the helm,
  The host-rail of the fey one; and then was the first time
  For that treasure dear lov'd that its might lay a-low.
  But therewithal steadfast, naught sluggish of valour,
  All mindful of high deeds was Hygelac's kinsman.                  1530
  Cast then the wounden blade bound with the gem-stones
  The warrior all angry, that it lay on the earth there,
  Stiff-wrought and steel-edged. In strength now he trusted,
  The hard hand-grip of might and main; so shall a man do
  When he in the war-tide yet looketh to winning
  The praise that is longsome, nor aught for life careth.
  Then fast by the shoulder, of the feud nothing recking,
  The lord of the War-Geats clutch'd Grendel's mother,
  Cast down the battle-hard, bollen with anger,
  That foe of the life, till she bow'd to the floor;                1540
  But swiftly to him gave she back the hand-guerdon
  With hand-graspings grim, and griped against him;
  Then mood-weary stumbled the strongest of warriors,
  The foot-kemp, until that adown there he fell.
  Then she sat on the hall-guest and tugg'd out her sax,
  The broad and brown-edged, to wreak her her son,
  Her offspring her own. But lay yet on his shoulder
  The breast-net well braided, the berg of his life,
  That 'gainst point and 'gainst edge the entrance withstood.
  Gone amiss then forsooth had been Ecgtheow's son                  1550
  Underneath the wide ground there, the kemp of the Geats,
  Save to him his war-byrny had fram'd him a help,
  The hard host-net; and save that the Lord God the Holy
  Had wielded the war-gain, the Lord the All-wise;
  Save that the skies' Ruler had rightwisely doom'd it
  All easily. Sithence he stood up again.




  XXIV. BEOWULF SLAYETH GRENDEL'S DAM,
  SMITETH OFF GRENDEL'S HEAD,
  AND COMETH BACK WITH HIS THANES TO HART.


  Midst the war-gear he saw then a bill victory-wealthy,
  An old sword of eotens full doughty of edges,
  The worship of warriors. That was choice of all weapons,
  Save that more was it made than any man other                     1560
  In the battle-play ever might bear it afield,
  So goodly, all glorious, the work of the giants.
  Then the girdled hilt seiz'd he, the Wolf of the Scyldings,
  The rough and the sword-grim, and drew forth the ring-sword,
  Naught weening of life, and wrathful he smote then
  So that there on her halse the hard edge begripped,
  And brake through the bone-rings: the bill all through-waded
  Her flesh-sheathing fey; cring'd she down on the floor;
  The sword was war-sweaty, the man in his work joy'd.
  The bright beam shone forth, the light stood withinward,          1570
  E'en as down from the heavens' clear high aloft shineth
  The sky's candle. He all along the house scanned;
  Then turn'd by the wall along, heav'd up his weapon
  Hard by the hilts the Hygelac's thane there,
  Ireful one-reded; naught worthless the edge was
  Unto the warrior; but rathely now would he
  To Grendel make payment of many war-onsets,
  Of them that he wrought on the folk of the West Danes
  Oftener by mickle than one time alone,
  Whenas he the hearthfellows of Hrothgar the King                  1580
  Slew in their slumber and fretted them sleeping,
  Men fifteen to wit of the folk of the Danes,
  And e'en such another deal ferry'd off outward,
  Loathly prey. Now he paid him his guerdon therefor,
  The fierce champion; so well, that abed there he saw
  Where Grendel war-weary was lying adown
  Forlorn of his life, as him ere had scathed
  The battle at Hart; sprang wide the body,
  Sithence after death he suffer'd the stroke,
  The hard swing of sword. Then he smote the head off him.          1590
    Now soon were they seeing, those sage of the carles,
  E'en they who with Hrothgar gaz'd down on the holm,
  That the surge of the billows was blended about,
  The sea stain'd with blood. Therewith the hoar-blended,
  The old men, of the good one gat talking together
  That they of the Atheling ween'd never eft-soon
  That he, glad in his war-gain, should wend him a-seeking
  The mighty king, since unto many it seemed
  That him the mere-she-wolf had sunder'd and broken.
  Came then nones of the day, and the ness there they gave up,      1600
  The Scyldings the brisk; and then busk'd him home thence-ward
  The gold-friend of men. But the guests, there they sat
  All sick of their mood, and star'd on the mere;
  They wist not, they ween'd not if him their own friend-lord
  Himself they should see.
                            Now that sword began
  Because of the war-sweat into icicles war-made,
  The war-bill, to wane: that was one of the wonders
  That it melted away most like unto ice
  When the bond of the frost the Father lets loosen,
  Unwindeth the wave-ropes, e'en he that hath wielding              1610
  Of times and of seasons, who is the sooth Shaper.
    In those wicks there he took not, the Weder-Geats' champion,
  Of treasure-wealth more, though he saw there a many,
  Than the off-smitten head and the sword-hilts together
  With treasure made shifting; for the sword-blade was molten,
  The sword broider'd was burn'd up, so hot was that blood,
  So poisonous the alien ghost there that had died.
  Now soon was a-swimming he who erst in the strife bode
  The war-onset of wrath ones; he div'd up through the water;
  And now were the wave-welters cleansed full well,                 1620
  Yea the dwellings full wide, where the ghost of elsewhither
  Let go of his life-days and the waning of living.
    Came then unto land the helm of the ship-lads
  Swimming stout-hearted, glad of his sea-spoil,
  The burden so mighty of that which he bore there.
  Yode then against him and gave thanks to God
  That fair heap of thanes, and were fain of their lord,
  For that hale and sound now they might see him with eyen;
  Then was from the bold one the helm and the byrny
  All speedily loosen'd. The lake now was laid,                     1630
  The water 'neath welkin with war-gore bestained.
  Forth then they far'd them alongst of the foot-tracks,
  Men fain of heart all, as they meted the earth-way,
  The street the well known; then those king-bold of men
  Away from the holm-cliff the head there they bore
  Uneasily ever to each one that bore it,
  The full stout-heart of men: it was four of them needs must
  On the stake of the slaughter with strong toil there ferry
  Unto the gold-hall the head of that Grendel;
  Until forthright in haste came into that hall,                    1640
  Fierce, keen in the hosting, a fourteen of men
  Of the Geat-folk a-ganging; and with them their lord,
  The moody amidst of the throng, trod the mead-plains;
  Came then in a-wending the foreman of thanes,
  The man keen of his deeds all beworshipp'd of doom,
  The hero, the battle-deer, Hrothgar to greet.
  Then was by the fell borne in onto the floor
  Grendel's head, whereas men were a-drinking in hall,
  Aweful before the earls, yea and the woman.
  The sight wondrous to see the warriors there look'd on.           1650




  XXV. CONVERSE OF HROTHGAR WITH BEOWULF.


  Spake out then Beowulf, Ecgtheow's bairn:
  What! we the sea-spoils here to thee, son of Healfdene,
  High lord of the Scyldings, with lust have brought hither
  For a token of glory, e'en these thou beholdest.
  Now I all unsoftly with life I escaped,
  In war under the water dar'd I the work
  Full hard to be worked, and well-nigh there was
  The sundering of strife, save that me God had shielded.
  So it is that in battle naught might I with Hrunting
  One whit do the work, though the weapon be doughty;               1660
  But to me then he granted, the Wielder of men,
  That on wall I beheld there all beauteous hanging
  An ancient sword, might-endow'd (often he leadeth right
  The friendless of men); so forth drew I that weapon.
  In that onset I slew there, as hap then appaid me,
  The herd of the house; then that bill of the host,
  The broider'd sword, burn'd up, and that blood sprang forth
  The hottest of battle-sweats; but the hilts thereof thenceforth
  From the foemen I ferry'd. I wreaked the foul deeds,
  The death-quelling of Danes, e'en as duly behoved.                1670
  Now this I behote thee, that here in Hart mayst thou
  Sleep sorrowless henceforth with the host of thy men
  And the thanes every one that are of thy people
  Of doughty and young; that for them need thou dread not,
  O high lord of Scyldings, on that behalf soothly
  Life-bale for the earls as erst thou hast done.
    Then was the hilt golden to the ancient of warriors,
  The hoary of host-leaders, into hand given,
  The old work of giants; it turn'd to the owning,
  After fall of the Devils, of the lord of the Danes,               1680
  That work of the wonder-smith, syth gave up the world
  The fierce-hearted groom, the foeman of God,
  The murder-beguilted, and there eke his mother;
  Unto the wielding of world-kings it turned,
  The best that there be betwixt of the sea-floods
  Of them that in Scaney dealt out the scat.
    Now spake out Hrothgar, as he look'd on the hilts there,
  The old heir-loom whereon was writ the beginning
  Of the strife of the old time, whenas the flood slew,
  The ocean a-gushing, that kin of the giants                       1690
  As fiercely they fared. That was a folk alien
  To the Lord everlasting; so to them a last guerdon
  Through the welling of waters the Wielder did give.
  So was on the sword-guards all of the sheer gold
  By dint of the rune-staves rightly bemarked,
  Set down and said for whom first was that sword wrought,
  And the choice of all irons erst had been done,
  Wreath-hilted and worm-adorn'd. Then spake the wise one,
  Healfdene's son, and all were gone silent:
    Lo that may he say, who the right and the soothfast             1700
  Amid the folk frameth, and far back all remembers,
  The old country's warden, that as for this earl here
  Born better was he. Uprear'd is the fame-blast
  Through wide ways far yonder, O Beowulf, friend mine,
  Of thee o'er all peoples. Thou hold'st all with patience,
  Thy might with mood-wisdom; I shall make thee my love good,
  As we twain at first spake it. For a comfort thou shalt be
  Granted long while and long unto thy people,
  For a help unto heroes. Naught such became Heremod
  To Ecgwela's offspring, the honourful Scyldings;                  1710
  For their welfare naught wax'd he, but for felling in slaughter,
  For the quelling of death to the folk of the Danes.
  Mood-swollen he brake there his board-fellows soothly,
  His shoulder-friends, until he sunder'd him lonely,
  That mighty of princes, from the mirth of all men-folk.
  Though him God the mighty in the joyance of might,
  In main strength, exalted high over all-men,
  And framed him forth, yet fast in his heart grew
  A breast-hoard blood-fierce; none of fair rings he gave
  To the Danes as due doom would. Unmerry he dured                  1720
  So that yet of that strife the trouble he suffer'd.
  A folk-bale so longsome. By such do thou learn thee,
  Get thee hold of man-valour: this tale for thy teaching
  Old in winters I tell thee. 'Tis wonder to say it,
  How the high God almighty to the kindred of mankind
  Through his mind the wide-fashion'd deals wisdom about,
  Home and earlship; he owneth the wielding of all.
  At whiles unto love he letteth to turn
  The mood-thought of a man that Is mighty of kindred,
  And in his land giveth him joyance of earth,                      1730
  And to have and to hold the high ward-burg of men,
  And sets so 'neath his wielding the deals of the world,
  Dominion wide reaching, that he himself may not
  In all his unwisdom of the ending bethink him.
  He wonneth well-faring, nothing him wasteth
  Sickness nor eld, nor the foe-sorrow to him
  Dark in mind waxeth, nor strife any where,
  The edge-hate, appeareth; but all the world for him
  Wends as he willeth, and the worse naught he wotteth.




  XXVI. MORE CONVERSE OF HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF:
  THE GEATS MAKE THEM READY FOR DEPARTURE.


  Until that within him a deal of o'erthink-ing                     1740
  Waxeth and groweth while sleepeth the warder,
  The soul's herdsman; that slumber too fast is forsooth,
  Fast bounden by troubles, the banesman all nigh,
  E'en he that from arrow-bow evilly shooteth.
  Then he in his heart under helm is besmitten
  With a bitter shaft; not a whit then may he ward him
  From the wry wonder-biddings of the ghost the all-wicked.
  Too little he deems that which long he hath hold.
  Wrath-greedy he covets; nor e'en for boast-sake gives
  The rings fair beplated; and the forth-coming doom                1750
  Forgetteth, forheedeth, for that God gave him erewhile,
  The Wielder of glory, a deal of the worship.
  At the ending-stave then it after befalleth
  That the shell of his body sinks fleeting away,
  And falleth all fey; and another one fetcheth,
  E'en one that undolefully dealeth the treasure,
  The earl's gains of aforetime, and fear never heedeth.
  From the bale-envy ward thee, lief Beowulf, therefore,
  Thou best of all men, and choose thee the better,
  The redes everlasting; to o'erthinkirig turn not,                 1760
  O mighty of champions! for now thy might breatheth
  For a short while of time; but eft-soon it shall be
  That sickness or edges from thy strength thee shall sunder,
  Or the hold of the fire, or the welling of floods,
  Or the grip of the sword-blade, or flight of the spear,
  Or eld the all-evil: or the beaming of eyen
  Shall fail and shall dim: then shall it be forthright
  That thee, lordly man, the death over-masters.
  E'en so I the Ring-Danes for an hundred of seasons
  Did wield under the welkin and lock'd them by war                 1770
  From many a kindred the Middle-Garth over
  With ash-spears and edges, in such wise that not ever
  Under the sky's run of my foemen I reckoned.
  What! to me in my land came a shifting of that,
  Came grief after game, sithence Grendel befell,
  My foeman of old, mine ingoer soothly.
  I from that onfall bore ever unceasing
  Mickle mood-care; herefor be thanks to the Maker,
  To the Lord everlasting, that in life I abided,
  Yea, that I on that head all sword-gory there,                    1780
  Now the old strife is over, with eyen should stare.
  Go fare thou to settle, the feast-joyance dree thou,
  O war-worshipp'd! unto us twain yet there will be
  Mickle treasure in common when come is the morning.
    Glad of mood then the Geat was, and speedy he gat him
  To go see the settle, as the sage one commanded.
  Then was after as erst, that they of the might-fame,
  The floor-sitters, fairly the feasting bedight them
  All newly. The helm of the night loured over
  Dark over the host-men. Uprose all the doughty,                   1790
  For he, the hoar-blended, would wend to his bed,
  That old man of the Scyldings. The Geat without measure,
  The mighty shield-warrior, now willed him rest.
  And soon now the hall-thane him of way-faring weary,
  From far away come, forth show'd him the road,
  E'en he who for courtesy cared for all things
  Of the needs of the thane, e'en such as on that day
  The farers o'er ocean would fainly have had.
    Rested then the wide-hearted; high up the house tower'd
  Wide-gaping all gold-dight; within slept the guest;               1800
  Until the black raven, the blithe-hearted, boded
  The heavens' joy: then was come thither a-hastening
  The bright sun o'er the plains, and hastened the scathers,
  The athelings once more aback to their people
  All fain to be faring; and far away thence
  Would the comer high-hearted go visit his keel.
  Bade then the hard one Hrunting to bear,
  The Ecglaf's son bade to take him his sword,
  The iron well-lov'd; gave him thanks for the lending,
  Quoth he that the war-friend for worthy he told,                  1810
  Full of craft in the war; nor with word he aught
  The edge of the sword. Hah! the high-hearted warrior.
  So whenas all way-forward, yare in their war-gear,
  Were the warriors, the dear one then went to the Danes,
  To the high seat went the Atheling, whereas was the other;
  The battle-bold warrior gave greeting to Hrothgar.




  XXVII. BEOWULF BIDS HROTHGAR FAREWELL:
  THE GEATS FARE TO SHIP.


  Out then spake Beowulf, Ecgtheow's bairn:
  As now we sea-farers have will to be saying,
  We from afar come, that now are we fainest
  Of seeking to Hygelac. Here well erst were we                     1820
  Serv'd as our wills would, and well thine avail was.
  If I on the earth then, be it e'en but a little,
  Of the love of thy mood may yet more be an-earning,
  O lord of the men-folk, than heretofore might I,
  Of the works of the battle yare then soon shall I be.
  If I should be learning, I over the flood's run,
  That the sitters about thee beset thee with dread,
  Even thee hating as otherwhile did they;
  Then thousands to theeward of thanes shall I bring
  For the helping of heroes. Of Hygelac wot I,                      1830
  The lord of the Geat-folk, though he be but a youngling,
  That shepherd of folk, that me will he further
  By words and by works, that well may I ward thee,
  And unto thine helping the spear-holt may bear,
  A main-staying mighty, whenas men thou art needing.
  And if therewith Hrethric in the courts of the Geat-house,
  The King's bairn, take hosting, then may he a many
  Of friends find him soothly: far countries shall be
  Better sought to by him who for himself is doughty.
    Out then spake Hrothgar in answer to himward:                   1840
  Thy word-saying soothly the Lord of all wisdom
  Hath sent into thy mind; never heard I more sagely
  In a life that so young was a man word be laying;
  Strong of might and main art thou and sage of thy mood,
  Wise the words of thy framing. Tell I this for a weening,
  If it so come to pass that the spear yet shall take,
  Or the battle all sword-grim, the son of that Hrethel,
  Or sickness or iron thine Alderman have,
  Thy shepherd of folk, and thou fast to life hold thee,
  Then no better than thee may the Sea-Geats be having              1850
  To choose for themselves, no one of the kings,
  Hoard-warden of heroes, if then thou wilt hold
  Thy kinsman's own kingdom. Me liketh thy mood-heart,
  The longer the better, O Beowulf the lief;
  In such wise hast thou fared, that unto the folks now,
  The folk of the Geats and the Gar-Danes withal,
  In common shall peace be, and strife rest appeased
  And the hatreds the doleful which erst they have dreed;
  Shall become, whiles I wield it, this wide realm of ours,
  Treasures common to either folk: many a one other                 1860
  With good things shall greet o'er the bath of the gannet;
  And the ring'd bark withal over sea shall be bringing
  The gifts and love-tokens. The twain folks I know
  Toward foeman toward friend fast-fashion'd together,
  In every way blameless as in the old wise.
  Then the refuge of warriors, he gave him withal,
  Gave Healfdene's son of treasures yet twelve;
  And he bade him with those gifts to go his own people
  To seek in all soundness, and swiftly come back.
  Then kissed the king, he of noble kin gotten,                     1870
  The lord of the Scyldings, that best of the thanes,
  By the halse then he took him; from him fell the tears
  From the blended of hoar hair. Of both things was there hoping
  To the old, the old wise one; yet most of the other,
  To wit, that they sithence each each might be seeing,
  The high-heart in council. To him so lief was he
  That he his breast-welling might nowise forbear,
  But there in his bosom, bound fast in his heart-bonds,
  After that dear man a longing dim-hidden
  Burn'd against blood-tie. So Beowulf thenceforth,                 1880
  The gold-proud of warriors, trod the mould grassy,
  Exulting in gold-store. The sea-ganger bided
  Its owning-lord whereas at anchor it rode.
  Then was there in going the gift of King Hrothgar
  Oft highly accounted; yea, that was a king
  In every wise blameless, till eld took from him eftsoon
  The joyance of might, as it oft scathes a many.




  XXVIII. BEOWULF COMES BACK TO HIS LAND.
  OF THE TALE OF THRYTHO.


  Came a many to flood then all mighty of mood,
  Of the bachelors were they, and ring-nets they bore,
  The limb-sarks belocked. The land-warden noted                    1890
  The earls' aback-faring, as erst he beheld them;
  Then nowise with harm from the nose of the cliff
  The guests there he greeted, but rode unto themward,
  And quoth that full welcome to the folk of the Weders
  The bright-coated warriors were wending to ship.
  Then was on the sand there the bark the wide-sided
  With war-weed beladen, the ring-stemm'd as she lay there
  With mares and with treasure; uptower'd the mast
  High over Hrothgar's wealth of the hoards.
    He then to the boat-warden handsel'd a gold-bounden             1900
  Sword, so that sithence was he on mead-bench
  Worthy'd the more for that very same wealth,
  The heirloom. Sithence in the ship he departed
  To stir the deep water; the Dane-land he left.
  Then was by the mast there one of the sea-rails,
  A sail, with rope made fast; thunder'd the sound-wood.
  Not there the wave-floater did the wind o'er the billows
  Waft off from its ways; the sea-wender fared,
  Floated the foamy-neck'd forth o'er the waves,
  The bounden-stemm'd over the streams of the sea;                  1910
  Till the cliffs of the Geats there they gat them to wit,
  The nesses well kenned. Throng'd up the keel then
  Driven hard by the lift, and stood on the land.
  Then speedy at holm was the hythe-warden yare,
  E'en he who a long while after the lief men
  Eager at stream's side far off had looked.
  To the sand thereon bound he the wide-fathom'd ship
  With anchor-bands fast, lest from them the waves' might
  The wood that was winsome should drive thence awayward.
    Thereon bade he upbear the athelings' treasures,                1920
  The fretwork and wrought gold. Not far from them thenceforth
  To seek to the giver of treasures it was,
  E'en Hygelac, Hrethel's son, where at home wonneth
  Himself and his fellows hard by the sea-wall.
  Brave was the builded house, bold king the lord was,
  High were the walls, Hygd very young,
  Wise and well-thriven, though few of winters
  Under the burg-locks had she abided,
  The daughter of Hæreth; naught was she dastard;
  Nowise niggard of gifts to the folk of the Geats,                 1930
  Of wealth of the treasures. But wrath Thrytho bore,
  The folk-queen the fierce, wrought the crime-deed full fearful.
  No one there durst it, the bold one, to dare,
  Of the comrades beloved, save only her lord,
  That on her by day with eyen he stare,
  But if to him death-bonds predestin'd he count on,
  Hand-wreathed; thereafter all rathely it was
  After the hand-grip the sword-blade appointed,
  That the cunning-wrought sword should show forth the deed,
  Make known the murder-bale. Naught is such queenlike              1940
  For a woman to handle, though peerless she be,
  That a weaver of peace the life should waylay,
  For a shame that was lying, of a lief man of men;
  But the kinsman of Hemming, he hinder'd it surely.
    Yet the drinkers of ale otherwise said they;
  That folk-bales, which were lesser, she framed forsooth,
  Lesser enmity-malice, since thence erst she was
  Given gold-deck'd to the young one of champions,
  She the dear of her lineage, since Offa's floor
  Over the fallow flood by the lore of her father                   1950
  She sought in her wayfaring. Well was she sithence
  There on the man-throne mighty with good;
  Her shaping of life well brooked she living;
  High love she held toward the lord of the heroes;
  Of all kindred of men by the hearsay of me
  The best of all was he the twain seas beside,
  Of the measureless kindred; thereof Offa was
  For gifts and for war, the spear-keen of men,
  Full widely beworthy'd, with wisdom he held
  The land of his heritage. Thence awoke Eomær                      1960
  For a help unto heroes, the kinsman of Hemming,
  The grandson of Garmund, the crafty in war-strife.




  XXIX. BEOWULF TELLS HYGELAC OF HROTHGAR:
  ALSO OF FREAWARU HIS DAUGHTER.


  Went his ways then the hard one, and he with his hand-shoal,
  Himself over the sand the sea-plain a-treading,
  The warths wide away; shone the world's candle,
  The sun slop'd from the southward; so dreed they their journey,
  And went their ways stoutly unto where the earls' refuge,
  The banesman of Ongentheow all in his burgs there,
  The young king of war, the good, as they heard it.
  Was dealing the rings. Aright unto Hygelac                        1970
  Was Beowulf's speeding made knowen full swiftly,
  That there into the house-place that hedge of the warriors,
  His mate of the linden-board, living was come,
  Hale from the battle-play home to him houseward.
  Then rathe was beroomed, as the rich one was bidding,
  For the guests a-foot going the floor all withinward.
    Then sat in the face of him he from the fight sav'd,
  Kinsman by kinsman, whenas his man-lord
  In fair-sounding speech had greeted the faithful
  With mightyful words. With mead-skinking turned                   1980
  Through the high house adown the daughter of Hæreth:
  The people she loved: the wine-bucket bare she
  To the hands of the men. But now fell to Hygelac
  His very house-fellow in that hall the high
  To question full fairly, for wit-lust to-brake him,
  Of what like were the journeys the Sea-Geats had wended:
    How befell you the sea-lode, O Beowulf lief,
  When thou on a sudden bethoughtst thee afar
  Over the salt water the strife to be seeking,
  The battle in Hart? or for Hrothgar forsooth                      1990
  The wide-kenned woe some whit didst thou mend,
  For that mighty of lords? I therefore the mood-care
  In woe-wellings seethed; trow'd not in the wending
  Of thee the lief man. A long while did I pray thee
  That thou the death-guest there should greet not a whit;
  Wouldst let those same South-Danes their own selves to settle
  The war-tide with Grendel. Now to God say I thank
  That thee, and thee sound, now may I see.
  Out then spake Beowulf, Ecgtheow's bairn:
  All undark it is, O Hygelac lord,                                 2000
  That meeting the mighty, to a many of men;
  Of what like was the meeting of Grendel and me
  On that field of the deed, where he many a deal
  For the Victory-Scyldings of sorrow had framed,
  And misery for ever; but all that I awreaked,
  So that needeth not boast any kinsman of Grendel
  Any one upon earth of that uproar of dawn-dusk,
  Nay not who lives longest of that kindred the loathly
  Encompass'd of fenland. Thither first did I come
  Unto that ring-hall Hrothgar to greet;                            2010
  Soon unto me the great Healfdene's son,
  So soon as my heart he was wotting forsooth.
  Right against his own son a settle there showed.
  All that throng was in joy, nor life-long saw I ever
  Under vault of the heavens amidst any hall-sitters
  More mirth of the mead. There the mighty Queen whiles,
  Peace-sib of the folk, went all over the floor,
  To the young sons bade heart up; oft she there the ring-wreath
  Gave unto a man ere to settle she wended.
  At whiles fore the doughty the daughter of Hrothgar               2020
  To the earls at the end the ale-bucket bore;
  E'en she whom Freawaru the floor-sitters thereat
  Heard I to name; where she the nail'd treasure
  Gave to the warriors. She was behight then
  Youngling and gold-dight to the glad son of Froda.
  This hath seemed fair to the friend of the Scyldings,
  The herd of the realm, and good rede he accounts it,
  That he with that wife of death-feuds a deal
  And of strifes should allay. Oft unseldom eachwhere
  After a lord's fall e'en but for a little                         2030
  Bows down the bane-spear, though doughty the bride be.




  XXX. BEOWULF FOREBODES ILL FROM THE WEDDING OF FREAWARU:
  HE TELLS OF GRENDEL AND HIS DAM.


  Ill-liking this may be to the lord of the Heathobards,
  And to each of the thanes of that same people.
  When he with fair bride on the floor of hall wendeth,
  That the Dane's noble bairn his doughty should wait on,
  As on him glisten there the heirlooms of the aged,
  Hard and with rings bedight, Heathobards' treasure,
  Whileas the weapons yet they might wield;
  Till astray did they lead there at the lind-play
  Their own fellows belov'd and their very own lives.               2040
  For then saith at the beer, he who seeth the ring,
  An ancient ash-warrior who mindeth of all
  The spear-death of men; grim is he of mind;
  Sad of mood he beginneth to tell the young champion.
  Through the thought of his heart his mind there to try,
  The war-bale to waken, and sayeth this word:
  Mayest thou, friend mine, wot of the war-sword,
  That which thy father bore in the fight
  Under the war-mask e'en on the last time,
  That the dear iron, whereas the Danes slew him,                   2050
  Wielded the death-field, since Withergyld lay,
  After fall of the heroes, the keen-hearted Scyldings?
  Now here of those banesmen the son, whoseso he be,
  All merry in fretwork forth on floor fareth;
  Of the murder he boasteth, and that jewel he beareth,
  E'en that which of right thou shouldest arede.
  Thus he mindeth and maketh word every of times,
  With sore words he telleth, until the time cometh
  That the thane of the fair bride for the deeds of his father
  After bite of the bill sleepeth all blood-stain'd,                2060
  All forfeit of life; but thenceforth the other
  Escapeth alive; the land well he kenneth;
  Then will be broken on both sides forsooth
  The oath-swearing of earls, whenas unto Ingeld
  Well up the death-hatreds, and the wife-loves of him
  Because of the care-wellings cooler become.
  Therefore the Heathobards' faith I account not,
  Their deal of the folk-peace, unguileful to Danes,
  Their fast-bounden friendship. Henceforth must I speak on
  Again about Grendel, that thou get well to know it,               2070
  O treasure-out-dealer, how sithence betided
  The hand-race of heroes: sithence heaven's gem
  All over the grounds glided, came the wroth guest,
  The dire night-angry one us to go look on,
  Whereas we all sound were warding the hall.
  There then for Handshoe was battle abiding,
  Life-bale to the fey; he first lay alow,
  The war-champion girded; unto him became Grendel,
  To the great thane of kindreds, a banesman of mouth,
  Of the man well-beloved the body he swallow'd;                    2080
  Nor the sooner therefor out empty-handed
  The bloody-tooth'd banesman, of bales all bemindful,
  Out from that gold-hall yet would he get him;
  But he, mighty of main, made trial of me,
  And gripp'd ready-handed. His glove hung aloft,
  Wondrous and wide, in wily bands fast,
  With cunning wiles was it begeared forsooth,
  With crafts of the devils and fells of the dragons;
  He me withinwards there, me the unsinning,
  The doer of big deeds would do me to be                           2090
  As one of the many; but naught so it might be,
  Sithence in mine anger upright I stood.
    'Tis over-long telling how I to the folkscather
  For each one of evils out paid the hand-gild.
  There I, O my lord king, them thy leal people
  Worthy'd with works: but away he gat loosed
  Out thence for a little while, brooked yet life-joys;
  But his right hand held ward of his track howsoever,
  High upon Hart-hall, and thence away humble
  He sad of his mood to the mere-ground fell downward.              2100
    Me for that slaughter-race the friend of the Scyldings
  With gold that beplated was mickle deal paid,
  With a many of treasures, sithence came the morning,
  And we to the feast-tide had sat us adown;
  Song was and glee there; the elder of Scyldings,
  Asking of many things, told of things o'erpast;
  Whiles hath the battle-deer there the harp's joy,
  The wood of mirth greeted; whiles the lay said he
  Soothfast and sorrowful; whiles a spell seldom told
  Told he by right, the king roomy-hearted;                         2110
  Whiles began afterward he by eld bounden,
  The aged hoar warrior, of his youth to bewail him,
  Its might of the battle; his breast well'd within him,
  When he, wont in winters, of many now minded.
    So we there withinward the livelong day's wearing
  Took pleasure amongst us, till came upon men
  Another of nights; then eftsoons again
  Was yare for the harm-wreak the mother of Grendel:
  All sorry she wended, for her son death had taken,
  The war-hate of the Weders: that monster of women                 2120
  Awreaked her bairn, and quelled a warrior
  In manner all mighty. Then was there from Aeschere,
  The wise man of old, life waning away;
  Nor him might they even when come was the morning,
  That death-weary wight, the folk of the Danes
  Burn up with the brand, nor lade on the bale
  The man well-belov'd, for his body she bare off
  In her fathom the fiendly all under the fell-stream.
    That was unto Hrothgar of sorrows the heaviest
  Of them which the folk-chieftain long had befallen.               2130
  Then me did the lord king, and e'en by thy life,
  Mood-heavy beseech me that I in the holm-throng
  Should do after earlship, my life to adventure,
  And frame me main-greatness, and meed he behight me.
  Then I of the welling flood, which is well kenned,
  The grim and the grisly ground-herder did find.
  There to us for a while was the blending of hands;
  The holm welled with gore, and the head I becarved
  In that hall of the ground from the Mother of Grendel
  With the all-eked edges; unsoftly out thence                      2140
  My life forth I ferry'd, for not yet was I fey.
  But the earls' burg to me was giving thereafter
  Much sort of the treasures, e'en Healfdene's son.




  XXXI. BEOWULF GIVES HROTHGAR'S GIFTS TO HYGELAC,
  AND BY HIM IS REWARDED.
  OF THE DEATH OF HYGELAC AND OF HEARDRED HIS SON,
  AND HOW BEOWULF IS KING OF THE GEATS:
  THE WORM IS FIRST TOLD OF.


  So therewith the folk-king far'd, living full seemly;
  By those wages forsooth ne'er a whit had I lost,
  By the meed of my main, but to me treasure gave he,
  The Healfdene's son, to the doom of myself;
  Which to thee, king of bold ones, will I be a-bringing,
  And gladly will give thee; for of thee is all gotten
  Of favours along, and but little have I                           2150
  Of head-kinsmen forsooth, saving, Hygelac, thee.
    Then he bade them bear in the boar-shape, the head-sign,
  The battle-steep war-helm, the byrny all hoary,
  The sword stately-good, and spell after he said:
  This raiment of war Hrothgar gave to my hand,
  The wise of the kings, and therewithal bade me,
  That I first of all of his favour should flit thee;
  He quoth that first had it King Heorogar of old,
  The king of the Scyldings, a long while of time;
  But no sooner would he give it unto his son,                      2160
  Heoroward the well-whet, though kind to him were he,
  This weed of the breast. Do thou brook it full well.
    On these fretworks, so heard I, four horses therewith,
  All alike, close followed after the track,
  Steeds apple-fallow. Fair grace he gave him
  Of horses and treasures. E'en thus shall do kinsman,
  And nowise a wile-net shall weave for another
  With craft of the darkness, or do unto death
  His very hand-fellow. But now unto Hygelac
  The bold in the battle was his nephew full faithful,              2170
  And either to other of good deeds was mindful.
  I heard that the neck-ring to Hygd did he give,
  E'en the wonder-gem well-wrought, that Wealh-theow gave him,
  The king's daughter; gave he three steeds therewithal
  Slender, and saddle-bright; sithence to her was,
  After the ring-gift, the breast well beworthy'd.
    Thus boldly he bore him, the Ecgtheow's bairn,
  The groom kenned in battle, in good deeds a-doing;
  After due doom he did, and ne'er slew he the drunken
  Hearth-fellows of him: naught rough was his heart;                2180
  But of all men of mankind with the greatest of might
  The gift fully and fast set, which had God to him given,
  That war-deer did hold. Long was he contemned,
  While the bairns of the Geats naught told him for good,
  Nor him on the mead-bench worthy of mickle
  The lord of the war-hosts would be a-making.
  Weened they strongly that he were but slack then,
  An atheling unkeen; then came about change
  To the fame-happy man for every foul harm.
    Bade then the earls' burg in to be bringing,                    2190
  The king battle-famed, the leaving of Hrethel,
  All geared with gold; was not 'mid the Geats then
  A treasure-gem better of them of the sword-kind,
  That which then on Beowulf's harm there he laid;
  And gave to him there seven thousand in gift,
  A built house and king-stool; to both them together
  Was in that folkship land that was kindly,
  Father-right, home; to the other one rather
  A wide realm, to him who was there the better.
  But thereafter it went so in days later worn                      2200
  Through the din of the battle, sithence Hygelac lay low
  And unto Heardred swords of the battle
  Under the war-board were for a bane;
  When fell on him midst of this victory-folk
  The hard battle-wolves, the Scyldings of war,
  And by war overwhelmed the nephew of Hereric;
  That sithence unto Beowulf turned the broad realm
  All into his hand. Well then did he hold it
  For a fifty of winters; then was he an old king,
  An old fatherland's warder; until one began                       2210
  Through the dark of the night-tide, a drake, to hold sway.
  In a howe high aloft watched over an hoard,
  A stone-burg full steep; thereunder a path sty'd
  Unknown unto men, and therewithin wended
  Who of men do I know not; for his lust there took he,
  From the hoard of the heathen his hand took away
  A hall-bowl gem-flecked, nowise back did he give it
  Though the herd of the hoard him sleeping beguil'd he
  With thief-craft; and this then found out the king,
  The best of folk-heroes, that wrath-bollen was he.                2220




  XXXII. HOW THE WORM CAME TO THE HOWE,
  AND HOW HE WAS ROBBED OF A CUP;
  AND HOW HE FELL ON THE FOLK.


  Not at all with self-wielding the craft of the worm-hoards
  He sought of his own will, who sore himself harmed;
  But for threat of oppression a thrall, of I wot not
  Which bairn of mankind, from blows wrathful fled,
  House-needy forsooth, and hied him therein,
  A man by guilt troubled. Then soon it betided
  That therein to the guest there stood grisly terror;
  However the wretched, of every hope waning
         *       *       *       *       *
  The ill-shapen wight, whenas the fear gat him,
  The treasure-vat saw; of such there was a many                    2230
  Up in that earth-house of treasures of old,
  As them in the yore-days, though what man I know not,
  The huge leavings and loom of a kindred of high ones,
  Well thinking of thoughts there had hidden away.
  Dear treasures. But all them had death borne away
  In the times of erewhile; and the one at the last
  Of the doughty of that folk that there longest lived,
  There waxed he friend-sad, yet ween'd he to tarry,
  That he for a little those treasures the longsome
  Might brook for himself. But a burg now all ready                 2240
  Wonn'd on the plain nigh the waves of the water,
  New by a ness, by narrow-crafts fasten'd;
  Within there then bare of the treasures of earls
  That herd of the rings a deal hard to carry,
  Of gold fair beplated, and few words he quoth:
    Hold thou, O earth, now, since heroes may hold not,
  The owning of earls. What! it erst within thee
  Good men did get to them; now war-death hath gotten,
  Life-bale the fearful, each man and every
  Of my folk; e'en of them who forwent the life:                    2250
  The hall-joy had they seen. No man to wear sword
  I own, none to brighten the beaker beplated,
  The dear drink-vat; the doughty have sought to else-whither.
  Now shall the hard war-helm bedight with the gold
  Be bereft of its plating; its polishers sleep,
  They that the battle-mask erewhile should burnish:
  Likewise the war-byrny, which abode in the battle
  O'er break of the war-boards the bite of the irons,
  Crumbles after the warrior; nor may the ring'd byrny
  After the war-leader fare wide afield                             2260
  On behalf of the heroes: nor joy of the harp is,
  No game of the glee-wood; no goodly hawk now
  Through the hall swingeth; no more the swift horse
  Beateth the burg-stead. Now hath bale-quelling
  A many of life-kin forth away sent.
    Suchwise sad-moody moaned in sorrow
  One after all, unblithely bemoaning
  By day and by night, till the welling of death
  Touch'd at his heart. The old twilight-scather
  Found the hoard's joyance standing all open,                      2270
  E'en he that, burning, seeketh to burgs,
  The evil drake, naked, that flieth a night-tide,
  With fire encompass'd; of him the earth-dwellers
  Are strongly adrad; wont is he to seek to
  The hoard in the earth, where he the gold heathen
  Winter-old wardeth; nor a whit him it betters.
    So then the folk-scather for three hundred winters
  Held in the earth a one of hoard-houses
  All-eked of craft, until him there anger'd
  A man in his mood, who bare to his man-lord                       2280
  A beaker beplated, and bade him peace-warding
  Of his lord: then was lightly the hoard searched over,
  And the ring-hoard off borne; and the boon it was granted
  To that wretched-wrought man. There then the lord saw
  That work of men foregone the first time of times.
  Then awaken'd the Worm, and anew the strife was;
  Along the stone stank he, the stout-hearted found
  The foot-track of the foe; he had stept forth o'er-far
  With dark craft, over-nigh to the head of the drake.
    So may the man unfey full easily outlive                        2290
  The woe and the wrack-journey, he whom the Wielder's
  Own grace is holding. Now sought the hoard-warden
  Eager over the ground; for the groom he would find
  Who unto him sleeping had wrought out the sore:
  Hot and rough-moody oft he turn'd round the howe
  All on the outward; but never was any man
  On the waste; but however in war he rejoiced,
  In battle-work. Whiles he turn'd back to his howe
  And sought to his treasure-vat; soon he found this,
  That one of the grooms had proven the gold,                       2300
  The high treasures; then the hoard-warden abided,
  But hardly forsooth, until come was the even,
  And all anger-bollen was then the burg-warden,
  And full much would the loath one with the fire-flame pay back
  For his drink-vat the dear. Then day was departed
  E'en at will to the Worm, and within wall no longer
  Would he bide, but awayward with burning he fared,
  All dight with the fire: it was fearful beginning
  To the folk in the land, and all swiftly it fell                  2310
  On their giver of treasure full grievously ended.




  XXXIII. THE WORM BURNS BEOWULF'S HOUSE,
  AND BEOWULF GETS READY TO GO AGAINST HIM.
  BEOWULF'S EARLY DEEDS IN BATTLE WITH THE HETWARE TOLD OF.


  Began then the guest to spew forth of gleeds,
  The bright dwellings to burn; stood the beam of the burning
  For a mischief to menfolk; now nothing that quick was
  The loathly lift-flier would leave there forsooth;
  The war of the Worm was wide to be seen there,
  The narrowing foe's hatred anigh and afar,
  How he, the fight-scather, the folk of the Geats
  Hated and harm'd; shot he back to the hoard,
  His dark lordly hall, ere yet was the day's while;
  The land-dwellers had he in the light low encompass'd             2320
  With bale and with brand; in his burg yet he trusted,
  His war-might and his wall: but his weening bewray'd him.
    Then Beowulf was done to wit of the terror
  Full swiftly forsooth, that the house of himself,
  Best of buildings, was molten in wellings of fire,
  The gift-stool of the Geats. To the good one was that
  A grief unto heart; of mind-sorrows the greatest.
  Weened the wise one, that Him, e'en the Wielder,
  The Lord everlasting, against the old rights
  He had bitterly anger'd; the breast boil'd within him             2330
  With dark thoughts, that to him were naught duly wonted.
    Now had the fire-drake the own fastness of folk,
  The water-land outward, that ward of the earth,
  With gleeds to ground wasted; so therefore the war-king,
  The lord of the Weder-folk, learned him vengeance.
  Then he bade be work'd for him, that fence of the warriors,
  And that all of iron, the lord of the earls,
  A war-board all glorious, for wissed he yarely
  That the holt-wood hereto might help him no whit,
  The linden 'gainst fire-flame. Of fleeting days now               2340
  The Atheling exceeding good end should abide,
  The end of the world's life, and the Worm with him also,
  Though long he had holden the weal of the hoard.
  Forsooth scorned then the lord of the rings
  That he that wide-flier with war-band should seek,
  With a wide host; he fear'd not that war for himself,
  Nor for himself the Worm's war accounted one whit,
  His might and his valour, for that he erst a many
  Strait-daring of battles had bided, and liv'd,
  Clashings huge of the battle, sithence he of Hrothgar,            2350
  He, the man victory-happy, had cleansed the hall,
  And in war-tide had gripped the kindred of Grendel,
  The loathly of kindreds; nor was that the least
  Of hand-meetings, wherein erst was Hygelac slain,
  Sithence the Geats' king in the onrush of battle,
  The lord-friend of the folks, down away in the Frieslands,
  The offspring of Hrethel, died, drunken of sword-drinks,
  All beaten of bill. Thence Beowulf came forth
  By his own craft forsooth, dreed the work of the swimming;
  He had on his arm, he all alone, thirty                           2360
  Of war-gears, when he to the holm went adown.
  Then nowise the Hetware needed to joy them
  Over the foot-war, wherein forth against him
  They bore the war-linden: few went back again
  From that wolf of the battle to wend to their homes.
    O'erswam then the waters' round Ecgtheow's son,
  Came all wretched and byrd-alone back to his people,
  Whereas offer'd him Hygd then the kingdom and hoard,
  The rings and the king-stool: trowed naught in the child,
  That he 'gainst folks outland the fatherland-seats                2370
  Might can how to hold, now was Hygelac dead:
  Yet no sooner therefor might the poor folk prevail
  To gain from the Atheling in any of ways
  That he unto Heardred would be for a lord,
  Or eke that that kingdom henceforward should choose;
  Yet him midst of the folk with friend-lore he held,
  All kindly with honour till older he waxed
  And wielded the Weder-Geats. To him men-waifs thereafter
  Sought from over the sea, the sons they of Ohthere,
  For they erst had withstood the helm of the Scylfings,            2380
  E'en him that was best of the kings of the sea,
  Of them that in Swede-realm dealt out the treasure,
  The mighty of princes. Unto him 'twas a life-mark;
  To him without food there was fated the life-wound,
  That Hygelac's son, by the swinging of swords;
  And him back departed Ongentheow's bairn,
  To go seek to his house, sithence Heardred lay dead,
  And let Beowulf hold the high seat of the king
  And wield there the Geats. Yea, good was that king.




  XXXIV. BEOWULF GOES AGAINST THE WORM.
  HE TELLS OF HEREBEALD AND HÆTHCYN.


  Of that fall of the folk-king he minded the payment               2390
  In days that came after: unto Eadgils he was
  A friend to him wretched; with folk he upheld him
  Over the wide sea, that same son of Ohthere,
  With warriors and weapons. Sithence had he wreaking
  With cold journeys of care: from the king took he life.
    Now each one of hates thus had he outlived,
  And of perilous slaughters, that Ecgtheow's son,
  All works that be doughty, until that one day
  When he with the Worm should wend him to deal.
    So twelvesome he set forth all swollen with anger,              2400
  The lord of the Geats, the drake to go look on.
  Aright had he learnt then whence risen the feud was,
  The bale-hate against men-folk: to his barm then had come
  The treasure-vat famous by the hand of the finder;
  He was in that troop of men the thirteenth
  Who the first of that battle had set upon foot,
  The thrall, the sad-minded; in shame must he thenceforth
  Wise the way to the plain; and against his will went he
  Thereunto, where the earth-hall the one there he wist,
  The howe under earth anigh the holm's welling,                    2410
  The wave-strife: there was it now full all within
  With gems and with wires; the monster, the warden,
  The yare war-wolf, he held him therein the hoard golden,
  The old under the earth: it was no easy cheaping
  To go and to gain for any of grooms.
    Sat then on the ness there the strife-hardy king
  While farewell he bade to his fellows of hearth,
  The gold-friend of the Geats; sad was gotten his soul,
  Wavering, death-minded; weird nigh beyond measure,
  Which him old of years gotten now needs must be greeting,         2420
  Must seek his soul's hoard and asunder must deal
  His life from his body: no long while now was
  The life of the Atheling in flesh all bewounden.
    Now spake out Beowulf, Ecgtheow's bairn:
  Many a one in my youth of war-onsets I outliv'd,
  And the whiles of the battle: all that I remember.
  Seven winters had I when the wielder of treasures,
  The lord-friend of folk, from my father me took,
  Held me and had me Hrethel the king,
  Gave me treasure and feast, and remember'd the friendship.        2430
  For life thence I was not to him a whit loather,
  A berne in his burgs than his bairns were, or each one,
  Herebeald, or Hæthcyn, or Hygelac mine.
  For the eldest there was in unseemly wise
  By the mere deed of kinsman a murder-bed strawen,
  Whenas him did Hæthcyn from out of his horn-bow,
  His lord and his friend, with shaft lay alow:
  His mark he miss'd shooting, and shot down his kinsman,
  One brother another with shaft all bebloody'd;
  That was fight feeless by fearful crime sinned,                   2440
  Soul-weary to heart, yet natheless then had
  The atheling from life all unwreak'd to be ceasing.
  So sad-like it is for a carle that is aged
  To be biding the while that his boy shall be riding
  Yet young on the gallows; then a lay should he utter,
  A sorrowful song whenas hangeth his son
  A gain unto ravens, and naught good of avail
  May he, old and exceeding old, anywise frame.
  Ever will he be minded on every each morning
  Of his son's faring otherwhere; nothing he heedeth                2450
  Of abiding another withinward his burgs,
  An heritage-warder, then whenas the one
  By the very death's need hath found out the ill.
  Sorrow-careful he seeth within his son's bower
  The waste wine-hall, the resting-place now of the winds,
  All bereft of the revel; the riders are sleeping,
  The heroes in grave, and no voice of the harp is,
  No game in the garths such as erewhile was gotten.




  XXXV. BEOWULF TELLS OF PAST FEUDS,
  AND BIDS FAREWELL TO HIS FELLOWS:
  HE FALLS ON THE WORM, AND THE BATTLE OF THEM BEGINS.


  Then to sleeping-stead wendeth he, singeth he sorrow,
  The one for the other; o'er-roomy all seem'd him                  2460
  The meads and the wick-stead. So the helm of the Weders
  For Herebeald's sake the sorrow of heart
  All welling yet bore, and in nowise might he
  On the banesman of that life the feud be a-booting;
  Nor ever the sooner that warrior might hate
  With deeds loathly, though he to him nothing was lief.
    He then with the sorrow wherewith that sore beset him
  Man's joy-tide gave up, and chose him God's light.
  To his offspring he left, e'en as wealthy man doeth,
  His land and his folk-burgs when he from life wended.             2470
    Then sin was and striving of Swedes and of Geats,
  Over the wide water war-tide in common,
  The hard horde-hate to wit sithence Hrethel perish'd;
  And to them ever were the Ongentheow's sons
  Doughty and host-whetting, nowise then would friendship
  Hold over the waters; but round about Hreosnaburgh
  The fierce fray of foeman was oftentimes fram'd.
  Kin of friends that mine were, there they awreaked
  The feud and the evil deed, e'en as was famed;
  Although he, the other, with his own life he bought it,           2480
  A cheaping full hard: unto Hæthcyn it was,
  To the lord of the Geat-folk, a life-fateful war.
  Learned I that the morrow one brother the other
  With the bills' edges wreaked the death on the banesman,
  Whereas Ongentheow is a-seeking of Eofor:
  Glode the war-helm asunder, the aged of Scylfings
  Fell, sword-bleak; e'en so remember'd the hand
  Feud enough; nor e'en then did the life-stroke withhold.
  I to him for the treasure which erewhile he gave me
  Repaid it in warring, as was to me granted,                       2490
  With my light-gleaming sword. To me gave he land,
  The hearth and the home-bliss: unto him was no need
  That unto the Gifthas or unto the Spear-Danes
  Or into the Swede-realm he needs must go seeking
  A worse wolf of war for a worth to be cheaping;
  For in the host ever would I be before him
  Alone in the fore-front, and so life-long shall I
  Be a-framing of strife, whileas tholeth the sword,
  Which early and late hath bestead me full often,
  Sithence was I by doughtiness unto Day-raven                      2500
  The hand-bane erst waxen, to the champion of Hug-folk;
  He nowise the fretwork to the king of the Frisians,
  The breast-worship to wit, might bring any more,
  But cringed in battle that herd of the banner,
  The Atheling in might: the edge naught was his bane,
  But for him did the war-grip the heart-wellings of him
  Break, the house of the bones. Now shall the bill's edge,
  The hand and hard sword, about the hoard battle.
    So word uttered Beowulf, spake out the boast word
  For the last while as now: Many wars dared I                      2510
  In the days of my youth, and now will I yet,
  The old warder of folk, seek to the feud,
  Full gloriously frame, if the scather of foul-deed
  From the hall of the earth me out shall be seeking.
    Greeted he then each one of the grooms,
  The keen wearers of helms, for the last while of whiles,
  His own fellows the dear: No sword would I fare with,
  No weapon against the Worm, wist I but how
  'Gainst the monster of evil in otherwise might I
  Uphold me my boast, as erst did I with Grendel;                   2520
  But there fire of the war-tide full hot do I ween me,
  And the breath, and the venom; I shall bear on me therefore
  Both the board and the byrny; nor the burg's warden shall I
  Overflee for a foot's-breadth, but unto us twain
  It shall be at the wall as to us twain Weird willeth,
  The Maker of each man. Of mood am I eager;
  So that 'gainst that war-flier from boast I withhold me.
  Abide ye upon burg with your byrnies bewarded,
  Ye men in your battle-gear, which may the better
  After the slaughter-race save us from wounding                    2530
  Of the twain of us. Naught is it yours to take over,
  Nor the measure of any man save alone me,
  That he on the monster should mete out his might,
  Or work out the earlship: but I with my main might
  Shall gain me the gold, or else gets me the battle,
  The perilous life-bale, e'en me your own lord.
    Arose then by war-round the warrior renowned
  Hard under helm, and the sword-sark he bare
  Under the stone-cliffs: in the strength then he trowed
  Of one man alone; no dastard's way such is.                       2540
  Then he saw by the wall (e'en he, who so many,
  The good of man-bounties, of battles had out-liv'd,
  Of crashes of battle whenas hosts were blended)
  A stone-bow a-standing, and from out thence a stream
  Breaking forth from the burg; was that burn's outwelling
  All hot with the war-fire; and none nigh to the hoard then
  Might ever unburning any while bide,
  Live out through the deep for the flame of the drake.
    Out then from his breast, for as bollen as was he,
  Let the Weder-Geats' chief the words be out faring;               2550
  The stout-hearted storm'd and the stave of him enter'd
  Battle-bright sounding in under the hoar stone.
  Then uproused was hate, and the hoard-warden wotted
  The speech of man's word, and no more while there was
  Friendship to fetch. Then forth came there first
  The breath of the evil beast out from the stone,
  The hot sweat of battle, and dinn'd then the earth.
    The warrior beneath the burg swung up his war-round
  Against that grisly guest, the lord of the Geats;
  Then the heart of the ring-bow'd grew eager therewith             2560
  To seek to the strife. His sword ere had he drawn,
  That good lord of the battle, the leaving of old,
  The undull of edges: there was unto either
  Of the bale-minded ones the fear of the other.
    All steadfast of mind stood against his steep shield
  The lord of the friends, when the Worm was a-bowing
  Together all swiftly, in war-gear he bided;
  Then boune was the burning one, bow'd in his going,
  To the fate of him faring. The shield was well warding
  The life and the lyke of the mighty lord king                     2570
  For a lesser of whiles than his will would have had it,
  If he at that frist on the first of the day
  Was to wield him, as weird for him never will'd it,
  The high-day of battle. His hand he up braided,
  The lord of the Geats, and the grisly-fleck'd smote he
  With the leaving of Ing, in such wise that the edge fail'd,
  The brown blade on the bone, and less mightily bit
  Than the king of the nation had need in that stour,
  With troubles beset. But then the burg-warden
  After the war-swing all wood of his mood                          2580
  Cast forth the slaughter-flame, sprung thereon widely
  The battle-gleams: nowise of victory he boasted,
  The gold-friend of the Geats; his war-bill had falter'd,
  All naked in war, in such wise as it should not,
  The iron exceeding good. Naught was it easy
  For him there, the mighty-great offspring of Ecgtheow,
  That he now that earth-plain should give up for ever;
  But against his will needs must he dwell in the wick
  Of the otherwhere country; as ever must each man
  Let go of his loan-days. Not long was it thenceforth              2590
  Ere the fell ones of fight fell together again.
  The hoard-warden up-hearten'd him, welled his breast
  With breathing anew. Then narrow need bore he,
  Encompass'd with fire, who erst the folk wielded;
  Nowise in a heap his hand-fellows there,
  The bairns of the athelings, stood all about him
  In valour of battle; but they to holt bow'd them;
  Their dear life they warded; but in one of them welled
  His soul with all sorrow. So sib-ship may never
  Turn aside any whit to the one that well thinketh.                2600




  XXXVI. WIGLAF SON OF WEOHSTAN
  GOES TO THE HELP OF BEOWULF:
  NÆGLING, BEOWULF'S SWORD, IS BROKEN ON THE WORM.


  Wiglaf so hight he, the son of Weohstan,
  Lief linden-warrior, and lord of Scylfings,
  The kinsman of Aelfhere: and he saw his man-lord
  Under his host-mask tholing the heat;
  He had mind of the honour that to him gave he erewhile.
  The wick-stead the wealthy of them, the Wægmundings,
  And the folk-rights each one which his father had owned.
  Then he might not withhold him, his hand gripp'd the round,
  Yellow linden; he tugg'd out withal the old sword,
  That was known among men for the heirloom of Eanmund,             2610
  Ohthere's son, unto whom in the strife did become,
  To the exile unfriended, Weohstan for the bane
  With the sword-edge, and unto his kinsmen bare off
  The helm the brown-brindled, the byrny beringed,
  And the old eoten-sword that erst Onela gave him;
  Were they his kinsman's weed of the war,
  Host-fight-gear all ready. Of the feud nothing spake he.
  Though he of his brother the bairn had o'er-thrown.
  But the host-gear befretted he held many seasons,
  The bill and the byrny, until his own boy might                   2620
  Do him the earlship as did his ere-father.
  Amidst of the Geats then he gave him the war-weed
  Of all kinds unnumber'd, whenas he from life wended
  Old on the forth-way. Then was the first time
  For that champion the young that he the war-race
  With his high lord the famed e'er he should frame:
  Naught melted his mood, naught the loom of his kinsman
  Weaken'd in war-tide; that found out the Worm
  When they two together had gotten to come.
    Now spake out Wiglaf many words rightwise,                      2630
  And said to his fellows: all sad was his soul:
  I remember that while when we gat us the mead,
  And whenas we behight to the high lord of us
  In the beer-hall, e'en he who gave us these rings,
  That we for the war-gear one while would pay,
  If unto him thislike need e'er should befall,
  For these helms and hard swords. So he chose us from host
  To this faring of war by his very own will,
  Of glories he minded us, and gave me these gems here,
  Whereas us of gar-warriors he counted for good,                   2640
  And bold bearers of helms. Though our lord e'en for us
  This work of all might was of mind all alone
  Himself to be framing, the herd of the folk,
  Whereas most of all men he hath mightiness framed.
  Of deeds of all daring, yet now is the day come
  Whereon to our man-lord behoveth the main
  Of good battle-warriors; so thereunto wend we,
  And help we the host-chief, whiles that the heat be,
  The gleed-terror grim. Now of me wotteth God
  That to me is much liefer that that, my lyke-body,                2650
  With my giver of gold the gleed should engrip.
  Unmeet it methinketh that we shields should bear
  Back unto our own home, unless we may erst
  The foe fell adown and the life-days defend
  Of the king of the Weders. Well wot I hereof
  That his old deserts naught such were, that he only
  Of all doughty of Geats the grief should be bearing.
  Sink at strife. Unto us shall one sword be, one helm,
  One byrny and shield, to both of us common.
    Through the slaughter-reek waded he then, bare his war-helm     2660
  To the finding his lord, and few words he quoth:
    O Beowulf the dear, now do thee all well,
  As thou in thy youthful life quothest of yore,
  That naught wouldst thou let, while still thou wert living,
  Thy glory fade out. Now shalt thou of deeds famed,
  The atheling of single heart, with all thy main deal
  For the warding thy life, and to stay thee I will.
    Then after these words all wroth came the Worm,
  The dire guest foesome, that second of whiles
  With fire-wellings flecked, his foes to go look on,               2670
  The loath men. With flame was lightly then burnt up
  The board to the boss, and might not the byrny
  To the warrior the young frame any help yet.
  But so the young man under shield of his kinsman
  Went onward with valour, whenas his own was
  All undone with gleeds; then again the war-king
  Remember'd his glories, and smote with mainmight
  With his battle-bill, so that it stood in the head
  Need-driven by war-hate. Then asunder burst Nægling,
  Waxed weak in the war-tide, e'en Beowulf's sword,                 2680
  The old and grey-marked; to him was not given
  That to him any whit might the edges of irons
  Be helpful in battle; over-strong was the hand
  Which every of swords, by the hearsay of me,
  With its swing over-wrought, when he bare unto strife
  A wondrous hard weapon; naught it was to him better.
    Then was the folk-scather for the third of times yet,
  The fierce fire-drake, all mindful of feud;
  He rac'd on that strong one, when was room to him given,
  Hot and battle-grim; he all the halse of him gripped              2690
  With bitter-keen bones; all bebloody'd he waxed
  With the gore of his soul. Well'd in waves then the war-sweat.




  XXXVII. THEY TWO SLAY THE WORM.
  BEOWULF IS WOUNDED DEADLY:
  HE BIDDETH WIGLAF BEAR OUT THE TREASURE.


  Then heard I that at need of the high king of folk
  The upright earl made well manifest might,
  His craft and his keenness as kind was to him;
  The head there he heeded not (but the hand burned
  Of that man of high mood when he helped his kinsman),
  Whereas he now the hate-guest smote yet a deal nether,
  That warrior in war-gear, whereby the sword dived,
  The plated, of fair hue, and thereby fell the flame               2700
  To minish thereafter, and once more the king's self
  Wielded his wit, and his slaying-sax drew out,
  The bitter and battle-sharp, borne on his byrny;
  Asunder the Weder's helm smote the Worm midmost;
  They felled the fiend, and force drave the life out,
  And they twain together had gotten him ending,
  Those athelings sib. E'en such should a man be,
  A thane good at need. Now that to the king was
  The last victory-while, by the deeds of himself,
  Of his work of the world. Sithence fell the wound,                2710
  That the earth-drake to him had wrought but erewhile.
  To swell and to sweal; and this soon he found out,
  That down in the breast of him bale-evil welled,
  The venom withinward; then the Atheling wended,
  So that he by the wall, bethinking him wisdom.
  Sat on seat there and saw on the works of the giants,
  How that the stone-bows fast stood on pillars,
  The earth-house everlasting upheld withinward.
    Then with his hand him the sword-gory,
  That great king his thane, the good beyond measure,               2720
  His friend-lord with water washed full well,
  The sated of battle, and unspanned his war-helm.
    Forth then spake Beowulf, and over his wound said,
  His wound piteous deadly; wist he full well,
  That now of his day-whiles all had he dreed,
  Of the joy of the earth; all was shaken asunder
  The tale of his days; death without measure nigh:
    Unto my son now should I be giving
  My gear of the battle, if to me it were granted
  Any ward of the heritage after my days                            2730
  To my body belonging. This folk have I holden
  Fifty winters; forsooth was never a folk-king
  Of the sitters around, no one of them soothly,
  Who me with the war-friends durst wend him to greet
  And bear down with the terror. In home have I abided
  The shapings of whiles, and held mine own well.
  No wily hates sought I; for myself swore not many
  Of oaths in unright. For all this may I,
  Sick with the life-wounds, soothly have joy.
  Therefore naught need wyte me the Wielder of men                  2740
  With kin murder-bale, when breaketh asunder
  My life from my lyke. And now lightly go thou
  To look on the hoard under the hoar stone,
  Wiglaf mine lief, now that lieth the Worm
  And sleepeth sore wounded, beshorn of his treasure;
  And be hasty that I now the wealth of old time,
  The gold-having may look on, and yarely behold
  The bright cunning gems, that the softlier may I
  After the treasure-weal let go away
  My life, and the folk-ship that long I have held.                 2750




  XXXVIII. BEOWULF BEHOLDETH THE TREASURE AND PASSETH AWAY.


  Then heard I that swiftly the son of that Weohstan
  After this word-say his lord the sore wounded,
  Battle-sick, there obeyed, and bare forth his ring-net,
  His battle-sark woven, in under the burg-roof;
  Saw then victory-glad as by the seat went he,
  The kindred-thane moody, sun-jewels a many,
  Much glistering gold lying down on the ground,
  Many wonders on wall, and the den of the Worm,
  The old twilight-flier; there were flagons a-standing,
  The vats of men bygone, of brighteners bereft,                    2760
  And maim'd of adornment; was many an helm
  Rusty and old, and of arm-rings a many
  Full cunningly twined. All lightly may treasure,
  The gold in the ground, every one of mankind
  Befool with o'erweening, hide it who will.
  Likewise he saw standing a sign there all-golden
  High over the hoard, the most of hand-wonders,
  With limb-craft belocked, whence light a ray gleamed.
  Whereby the den's ground-plain gat he to look on,
  The fair works scan throughly. Not of the Worm there              2770
  Was aught to be seen now, but the edge had undone him.
  Heard I then that in howe of the hoard was bereaving,
  The old work of the giants, but one man alone,
  Into his barm laded beakers and dishes
  At his very own doom; and the sign eke he took,
  The brightest of beacons. But the bill of the old lord
  (The edge was of iron) erewhile it scathed
  Him who of that treasure hand-bearer was
  A long while, and fared a-bearing the flame-dread
  Before the hoard hot, and welling of fierceness                   2780
  In the midnights, until that by murder he died.
    In haste was the messenger, eager of back-fare,
  Further'd with fretted gems. Him longing fordid
  To wot whether the bold man he quick there shall meet
  In that mead-stead, e'en he the king of the Weders,
  All sick of his might, whereas he erst Itft him.
    He fetching the treasure then found the king mighty,
  His own lord, yet there, and him ever all gory
  At end of his life; and he yet once again
  Fell the water to warp o'er him, till the word's point            2790
  Brake through the breast-hoard, and Beowulf spake out.
  The aged, in grief as he gaz'd on the gold:
    Now I for these fretworks to the Lord of all thanking,
  To the King of all glory, in words am yet saying,
  To the Lord ever living, for that which I look on;
  Whereas such I might for the people of mine,
  Ere ever my death-day, get me to own.
  Now that for the treasure-hoard here have I sold
  My life and laid down the same, frame still then ever
  The folk-need, for here never longer I may be.                    2800
  So bid ye the war-mighty work me a howe
  Bright after the bale-fire at the sea's nose,
  Which for a remembrance to the people of me
  Aloft shall uplift him at Whale-ness for ever,
  That it the sea-goers sithence may hote
  Beowulf's Howe, e'en they that the high-ships
  Over the flood-mists drive from afar.
    Did off from his halse then a ring was all golden,
  The king the great-hearted, and gave to his thane,
  To the spear-warrior young his war-helm gold-brindled,            2810
  The ring and the byrny, and bade him well brook them:
    Thou art the end-leaving of all of our kindred,
  The Wægmundings; Weird now hath swept all away
  Of my kinsmen, and unto the doom of the Maker
  The earls in their might; now after them shall I.
    That was to the aged lord youngest of words
  Of his breast-thoughts, ere ever he chose him the bale,
  The hot battle-wellings; from his heart now departed
  His soul, to seek out the doom of the soothfast.




  XXXIX. WIGLAF CASTETH SHAME ON THOSE FLEERS.


  But gone was it then with the unaged man                          2820
  Full hard that there he beheld on the earth
  The liefest of friends at the ending of life,
  Of bearing most piteous. And likewise lay his bane
  The Earth-drake, the loathly fear, reft of his life,
  By bale laid undone: the ring-hoards no longer
  The Worm, the crook-bowed, ever might wield;
  For soothly the edges of the irons him bare off,
  The hard battle-sharded leavings of hammers,
  So that the wide-flier stilled with wounding
  Fell onto earth anigh to his hoard-hall,                          2830
  Nor along the lift ever more playing he turned
  At middle-nights, proud of the owning of treasure,
  Show'd the face of him forth, but to earth there he fell
  Because of the host-leader's work of the hand.
    This forsooth on the land hath thriven to few,
  Of men might and main bearing, by hearsay of mine,
  Though in each of all deeds full daring he were,
  That against venom-scather's fell breathing he set on,
  Or the hall of his rings with hand be a-stirring,
  If so be that he waking the warder had found                      2840
  Abiding in burg. By Beowulf was
  His deal of the king-treasure paid for by death;
  There either had they fared on to the end
  Of this loaned life. Long it was not until
  Those laggards of battle the holt were a-leaving,
  Unwarlike troth-liars, the ten there together,
  Who durst not e'en now with darts to be playing
  E'en in their man-lord's most mickle need.
  But shamefully now their shields were they bearing,
  Their weed of the battle, there where lay the aged;               2850
  They gazed on Wiglaf where weary'd he sat,
  The foot-champion, hard by his very lord's shoulder,
  And wak'd him with water: but no whit it sped him;
  Never might he on earth howsoe'er well he will'd it
  In that leader of spears hold the life any more,
  Nor the will of the Wielder change ever a whit;
  But still should God's doom of deeds rule the rede
  For each man of men, as yet ever it doth.
  Then from out of the youngling an answer full grim
  Easy got was for him who had lost heart erewhile,                 2860
  And word gave out Wiglaf, Weohstan's son
  The sorrowful-soul'd man: on those unlief he saw:
  Lo that may he say who sooth would be saying,
  That the man-lord who dealt you the gift of those dear things,
  The gear of the war-host wherein there ye stand,
  Whereas he on the ale-bench full oft was a-giving
  Unto the hall-sitters war-helm and byrny,
  The king to his thanes, e'en such as he choicest
  Anywhere, far or near, ever might find:
  That he utterly wrongsome those weeds of the war                  2870
  Had cast away, then when the war overtook him.
  Surely never the folk-king of his fellows in battle
  Had need to be boastful; howsoever God gave him,
  The Victory-wielder, that he himself wreaked him
  Alone with the edge, when to him need of might was.
  Unto him of life-warding but little might I
  Give there in the war-tide; and yet I began
  Above measure of my might my kinsman to help;
  Ever worse was the Worm then when I with sword
  Smote the life-foe, and ever the fire less strongly               2880
  Welled out from his wit. Of warders o'er little
  Throng'd about the king when him the battle befell.
    Now shall taking of treasures and giving of swords
  And all joy of your country-home fail from your kindred,
  All hope wane away; of the land-right moreover
  May each of the men of that kinsman's burg ever
  Roam lacking; sithence that the athelings eft-soons
  From afar shall have heard of your faring in flight,
  Your gloryless deed. Yea, death shall be better
  For each of the earls than a life ever ill-fam'd.                 2890




  XL. WIGLAF SENDETH TIDING TO THE HOST: THE WORDS OF THE MESSENGER.


  Then he bade them that war-work give out at the barriers
  Up over the sea-cliff, whereas then the earl-host
  The morning-long day sat sad of their mood,
  The bearers of war-boards, in weening of both things,
  Either the end-day, or else the back-coming
  Of the lief man. Forsooth he little was silent
  Of the new-fallen tidings who over the ness rode,
  But soothly he said over all there a-sitting:
    Now is the will-giver of the folk of the Weders,
  The lord of the Geats, fast laid in the death-bed,                2900
  In the slaughter-rest wonneth he by the Worm's doings.
  And beside him yet lieth his very life-winner
  All sick with the sax-wounds; with sword might he never
  On the monster, the fell one, in any of manners
  Work wounding at all. There yet sitteth Wiglaf,
  Weohstan's own boy, over Beowulf king,
  One earl over the other, over him the unliving;
  With heart-honours holdeth he head-ward withal
  Over lief, over loath. But to folk is a weening
  Of war-tide as now, so soon as unhidden                           2910
  To Franks and to Frisians the fall of the king
  Is become over widely. Once was the strife shapen
  Hard 'gainst the Hugs, sithence Hygelac came
  Faring with float-host to Frisian land,
  Whereas him the Hetware vanquish'd in war,
  With might gat the gain, with o'er-mickle main;
  The warrior bebyrny'd he needs must bow down:
  He fell in the host, and no fretted war-gear
  Gave that lord to the doughty, but to us was aye sithence
  The mercy ungranted that was of the Merwing.                      2920
  Nor do I from the Swede folk of peace or good faith
  Ween ever a whit. For widely 'twas wotted
  That Ongentheow erst had undone the life
  Of Hæthcyn the Hrethel's son hard by the Raven-wood,
  Then when in their pride the Scylfings of war
  Erst gat them to seek to the folk of the Geats.
  Unto him soon the old one, the father of Ohthere,
  The ancient and fearful gave back the hand-stroke,
  Brake up the sea-wise one, rescued his bride.
  The aged his spouse erst, bereft of the gold,                     2930
  Mother of Onela, yea and of Ohthere;
  And follow'd up thereon his foemen the deadly,
  Until they betook them and sorrowfully therewith
  Unto the Raven-holt, reft of their lord.
  With huge host then beset he the leaving of swords
  All weary with wounds, and woe he behight them,
  That lot of the wretched, the livelong night through;
  Quoth he that the morrow's morn with the swords' edges
  He would do them to death, hang some on the gallows
  For a game unto fowl. But again befell comfort                    2940
  To the sorry of mood with the morrow-day early;
  Whereas they of Hygelac's war-horn and trumpet
  The voice wotted, whenas the good king his ways came
  Faring on in the track of his folk's doughty men.




  XLI. MORE WORDS OF THE MESSENGER.
  HOW HE FEARS THE SWEDES WHEN THEY WOT OF BEOWULF DEAD.


  Was the track of the war-sweat of Swedes and of Geats,
  The men's slaughter-race, right wide to be seen,
  How those folks amongst them were waking the feud.
  Departed that good one, and went with his fellows,
  Old and exceeding sad, fastness to seek;
  The earl Ongentheow upward returned;                              2950
  Of Hygelac's battle-might oft had he heard,
  The war-craft of the proud one; in withstanding he trow'd not,
  That he to the sea-folk in fight might debate,
  Or against the sea-farers defend him his hoard,
  His bairns and his bride. He bow'd him aback thence,
  The old under the earth-wall. Then was the chase bidden
  To the Swede-folk, and Hygelac's sign was upreared,
  And the plain of the peace forth on o'er-pass'd they,
  After the Hrethlings onto the hedge throng'd.
  There then was Ongentheow by the swords' edges,                   2960
  The blent-hair'd, the hoary one, driven to biding,
  So that the folk-king fain must he take
  Sole doom of Eofor. Him in his wrath then
  Wulf the Wonreding reach'd with his weapon,
  So that from the stroke sprang the war-sweat in streams
  Forth from under his hair; yet naught fearsome was he,
  The aged, the Scylfing, but paid aback rathely
  With chaffer that worse was that war-crash of slaughter,
  Sithence the folk-king turned him thither;
  And nowise might the brisk one that son was of Wonred             2970
  Unto the old carle give back the hand-slaying,
  For that he on Wulf's head the helm erst had sheared,
  So that all with the blood stained needs must he bow,
  And fell on the field; but not yet was he fey,
  But he warp'd himself up, though the wound had touch'd nigh.
  But thereon the hard Hygelac's thane there,
  Whenas down lay his brother, let the broad blade,
  The old sword of eotens, that helm giant-fashion'd
  Break over the board-wall, and down the king bowed,
  The herd of the folk unto fair life was smitten.                  2980
  There were many about there who bound up his kinsman,
  Upraised him swiftly when room there was made them,
  That the slaughter-stead there at the stour they might wield,
  That while when was reaving one warrior the other:
  From Ongentheow took he the iron-wrought byrny,
  The hard-hilted sword, with his helm all together:
  The hoary one's harness to Hygelac bare he;
  The fret war-gear then took he, and fairly behight him
  Before the folk due gifts, and even so did it;
  Gild he gave for that war-race, the lord of the Geats,            2990
  The own son of Hrethel, when home was he come,
  To Eofor and Wulf gave he over-much treasure,
  To them either he gave an hundred of thousands,
  Land and lock'd rings. Of the gift none needed to wyte him
  Of mid earth, since the glory they gained by battle.
  Then to Eofor he gave his one only daughter,
  An home-worship soothly, for pledge of his good will.
    That is the feud and the foeship full soothly,
  The dead-hate of men, e'en as I have a weening,
  Wherefor the Swede people against us shall seek,                  3000
  Sithence they have learned that lieth our lord
  All lifeless; e'en he that erewhile hath held
  Against all the haters the hoard and the realm;
  Who after the heroes' fall held the fierce Scylfings,
  Framed the folk-rede, and further thereto
  Did earlship-deeds. Now is haste best of all
  That we now the folk-king should fare to be seeing,
  And then that we bring him who gave us the rings
  On his way to the bale: nor shall somewhat alone
  With the moody be molten; but manifold hoard is,                  3010
  Gold untold of by tale that grimly is cheapened,
  And now at the last by this one's own life
  Are rings bought, and all these the brand now shall fret,
  The flame thatch them over: no earl shall bear off
  One gem in remembrance; nor any fair maiden
  Shall have on her halse a ring-honour thereof,
  But in grief of mood henceforth, bereaved of gold,
  Shall oft, and not once alone, alien earth tread,
  Now that the host-learn'd hath laid aside laughter,
  The game and the glee-joy. Therefore shall the spear,             3020
  Full many a morn-cold, of hands be bewounden,
  Uphoven in hand; and no swough of the harp
  Shall waken the warriors; but the wan raven rather
  Fain over the fey many tales shall tell forth,
  And say to the erne how it sped him at eating,
  While he with the wolf was a-spoiling the slain.
    So was the keen-whetted a-saying this while
  Spells of speech loathly; he lied not much
  Of weirds or of words. Then uprose all the war-band,
  And unblithe they wended under the Ernes-ness,                    3030
  All welling of tears, the wonder to look on.
  Found they then on the sand, now lacking of soul,
  Holding his bed, him that gave them the rings
  In time erewhile gone by. But then was the end-day
  Gone for the good one; since the king of the battle,
  The lord of the Weders, in wonder-death died.
  But erst there they saw a more seldom-seen sight,
  The Worm on the lea-land over against him
  Down lying there loathly; there was the fire-drake,
  The grim of the terrors, with gleeds all beswealed.               3040
  He was of fifty feet of his measure
  Long of his lying. Lift-joyance held he
  In the whiles of the night, but down again wended
  To visit his den. Now fast was he in death,
  He had of the earth-dens the last end enjoyed.
  There by him now stood the beakers and bowls,
  There lay the dishes and dearly-wrought swords,
  Rusty, through-eaten they, as in earth's bosom
  A thousand of winters there they had wonned.
  For that heritage there was, all craftily eked,                   3050
  Gold of the yore men, in wizardry wounden;
  So that that ring-hall might none reach thereto,
  Not any of mankind but if God his own self,
  Sooth king of victories, gave unto whom he would
  (He is holder of men) to open that hoard,
  E'en to whichso of mankind should seem to him meet.




  XLII. THEY GO TO LOOK ON THE FIELD OF DEED.


  Then it was to be seen that throve not the way
  To him that unrightly had hidden within there
  The fair gear 'neath the wall. The warder erst slew
  Some few of folk, and the feud then became                        3060
  Wrothfully wreaked. A wonder whenas
  A valour-strong earl may reach on the ending
  Of the fashion of life, when he longer in nowise
  One man with his kinsmen may dwell in the mead-hall!
  So to Beowulf was it when the burg's ward he sought.
  For the hate of the weapons: he himself knew not
  Wherethrough forsooth his world's sundering should be.
  So until Doomsday they cursed it deeply,
  Those princes the dread, who erst there had done it,
  That that man should be of sins never sackless,                   3070
  A-hoppled in shrines, in hell-bonds fast set,
  With plague-spots be punish'd, who that plain should plunder.
  But naught gold-greedy was he, more gladly had he
  The grace of the Owner erst gotten to see.
    Now spake out Wiglaf, that son was of Weohstan:
  Oft shall many an earl for the will but of one
  Dree the wrack, as to us even now is befallen:
  Nowise might we learn the lief lord of us,
  The herd of the realm, any of rede,
  That he should not go greet that warder of gold,                  3080
  But let him live yet, whereas long he was lying,
  And wonne in his wicks until the world's ending;
  But he held to high weird and the hoard hath been seen,
  Grimly gotten: o'er hard forsooth was that giving,
  That the king of the folk e'en thither enticed.
  Lo! I was therein, and I look'd it all over,
  The gear of the house, when for me room was gotten,
  But I lightly in nowise had leave for the passage
  In under the earth-wall; in haste I gat hold
  Forsooth with my hands of a mickle main burden                    3090
  Of hoard-treasures, and hither then out did I bear them,
  Out unto my king, and then quick was he yet,
  Wise, and wit-holding: a many things spake he,
  That aged in grief-care, and bade me to greet you,
  And prayed ye would do e'en after your friend's deeds
  Aloft in the bale-stead a howe builded high,
  Most mickle and mighty, as he amongst men was
  The worthfullest warrior wide over the world,
  While he the burg-weal erewhile might brook.
  Then so let us hasten this second of whiles                       3100
  To see and to seek the throng of things strange,
  The wonder 'neath wall; I shall wise you the way,
  So that ye from a-near may look on enough
  Of rings and broad gold; and be the bier swiftly
  All yare thereunto, whenas out we shall fare.
  Then let us so ferry the lord that was ours,
  The lief man of men, to where long shall he
  In the All-Wielder's keeping full patiently wait.
    Bade then to bid the bairn of that Weohstan,
  The deer of the battle, to a many of warriors,                    3110
  The house-owning wights, that the wood of the bale
  They should ferry from far, e'en the folk-owning men,
  Toward the good one. And now shall the gleed fret away,
  The wan flame a-waxing, the strong one of warriors,
  Him who oft-times abided the shower of iron
  When the storm of the shafts driven on by the strings
  Shook over the shield-wall, and the shaft held its service,
  And eager with feather-gear follow'd the barb.
    Now then the wise one, that son was of Weohstan,
  Forth from the throng then call'd of the king's thanes            3120
  A seven together, the best to be gotten,
  And himself went the eighth in under the foe-roof;
  One man of the battlers in hand there he bare
  A gleam of the fire, of the first went he inward.
  It was nowise allotted who that hoard should despoil,
  Sithence without warden some deal that there was
  The men now beheld in the hall there a-wonning,
  Lying there fleeting; little mourn'd any,
  That they in all haste outward should ferry
  The dear treasures. But forthwith the drake did they shove,       3130
  The Worm, o'er the cliff-wall, and let the wave take him,
  The flood fathom about the fretted works' herd.
    There then was wounden gold on the wain laden
  Untold of each kind, and the Atheling borne,
  The hoary of warriors, out on to Whale-ness.




  XLIII. OF THE BURIAL OF BEOWULF.


  For him then they geared, the folk of the Geats,
  A pile on the earth all unweaklike that was,
  With war-helms behung, and with boards of the battle,
  And bright byrnies, e'en after the boon that he bade.
  Laid down then amidmost their king mighty-famous                  3140
  The warriors lamenting, the lief lord of them.
  Began on the burg of bale-fires the biggest
  The warriors to waken: the wood-reek went up
  Swart over the smoky glow, sound of the flame
  Bewound with the weeping (the wind-blending stilled),
  Until it at last the bone-house had broken
  Hot at the heart. All unglad of mind
  With mood-care they mourned their own liege lord's quelling.
  Likewise a sad lay the wife of aforetime
  For Beowulf the king, with her hair all upbounden,                3150
  Sang sorrow-careful; said oft and over
  That harm-days for herself in hard wise she dreaded,
  The slaughter-falls many, much fear of the warrior,
  The shaming and bondage. Heaven swallow'd the reek.
  Wrought there and fashion'd the folk of the Weders
  A howe on the lithe, that high was and broad.
  Unto the wave-farers wide to be seen:
  Then it they betimber'd in time of ten days,
  The battle-strong's beacon; the brands' very-leavings
  They bewrought with a wall in the worthiest of ways,              3160
  That men of all wisdom might find how to work.
    Into burg then they did the rings and bright sun-gems,
  And all such adornments as in the hoard there
  The war-minded men had taken e'en now;
  The earls' treasures let they the earth to be holding,
  Gold in the grit, wherein yet it liveth,
  As useless to men-folk as ever it erst was.
    Then round the howe rode the deer of the battle,
  The bairns of the athelings, twelve were they in all.
  Their care would they mourn, and bemoan them their king,          3170
  The word-lay would they utter and over the man speak:
  They accounted his earlship and mighty deeds done,
  And doughtily deem'd them; as due as it is
  That each one his friend-lord with words should belaud,
  And love in his heart, whenas forth shall he
  Away from the body be fleeting at last.
    In such wise they grieved, the folk of the Geats,
  For the fall of their lord, e'en they his hearth-fellows;
  Quoth they that he was a world-king forsooth,
  The mildest of all men, unto men kindest,                         3180
  To his folk the most gentlest, most yearning of fame.




PERSONS AND PLACES

(_Numbers refer to Pages_)

  [Transcriber's Note:
  In this and the following section, page numbers in parentheses are
  accompanied by a line reference in brackets.]


BEANSTAN, father of Breca (31 [524]).

Beowulf the Dane (not Beowulf the Geat, the hero of the poem) was the
grandfather of Hrothgar (2, 4 [18, 53]).

Beowulf the Geat. _See_ the Argument.

Breca (30 [506]), who contended with Beowulf in swimming, was a chief of
the Brondings (31 [521]).

Brisings' neck-gear (70 [1199]). "This necklace is the Brisinga-men, the
costly necklace of Freyja, which she won from the dwarfs and which was
stolen from her by Loki, as is told in the Edda" (Kemble). In our poem,
it is said that Hama carried off this necklace when he fled from
Eormenric, king of the Ostrogoths.


DAYRAVEN (143 [2500]), a brave warrior of the Hugs, and probably the
slayer of Hygelac, whom, in that case, Beowulf avenged.


EADGILS, Eanmund (136, 137 [2379, 2391]), "sons of Ohthere," and nephews
of the Swedish King Onela, by whom they were banished from their native
land for rebellion. They took refuge at the court of the Geat King
Heardred, and Onela, "Ongentheow's bairn," enraged at their finding an
asylum with his hereditary foes, invaded Geatland, and slew Heardred. At
a later time Beowulf, when king of the Geats, balanced the feud by
supporting Eadgils in an invasion of Sweden, in which King Onela was
slain.

Eanmund (149 [2610]), while in exile at the court of the Geats, was
slain by Weohstan, father of Wiglaf, and stripped of the armour given
him by his uncle, the Swedish King Onela. Weohstan "spake not about the
feud, although he had slain Onela's brother's son," probably because he
was not proud of having slain an "exile unfriended" in a private
quarrel.

Ecglaf, father of Unferth, Hrothgar's spokesman (29 [499]).

Ecgtheow (22 [373]), father of Beowulf the Geat, by the only daughter of
Hrethel, king of the Geats. Having slain Heatholaf, a warrior of the
Wylfings, Ecgtheow sought protection at the court of the Danish King
Hrothgar, who accepted his fealty and settled the feud by a
money-payment (27 [463]). Hence the heartiness of Beowulf's welcome at
Hrothgar's hands.

Ecgwela. The Scyldings or Danes are once called "Ecgwela's offspring"
(99 [1710]). He may have been the founder of the older dynasty of Danish
kings which ended with Heremod.

Eofor (142, 167-9 [2485, 2963-2996]), a Geat warrior, brother of Wulf.
He came to the aid of his brother in his single combat with the Swedish
King Ongentheow, and slew the king, being rewarded by Hygelac with the
hand of his only daughter.

Eotens (61, 62, 66 [1072, 1088, 1141]) are the people of Finn, king of
Friesland. In other passages, it is merely a name for a race of
monsters.


FINN (61-7 [1068-1156]). The somewhat obscure Finn episode in _Beowulf_
appears to be part of a Finn epic, of which only the merest fragment,
called the _Fight at Finnsburg_, is extant. The following conjectured
outline of the whole story is based on this fragment and on the Beowulf
episode; Finn, king of the Frisians, had carried off Hildeburh, daughter
of Hoc, probably with her consent. Her father, Hoc, seems to have
pursued the fugitives, and to have been slain in the fight which ensued
on his overtaking them. After the lapse of some twenty years Hoc's sons,
Hnæf and Hengest, are old enough to undertake the duty of avenging their
father's death. They make an inroad into Finn's country, and a battle
takes place in which many warriors, among them Hnæf and a son of Finn,
are killed. Peace is then solemnly concluded, and the slain warriors are
burnt. As the year is too far advanced for Hengest to return home, he
and those of his men who survive remain for the winter in the Frisian
country with Finn. But Hengest's thoughts dwell constantly on the death
of his brother Hnæf, and he would gladly welcome any excuse to break the
peace which had been sworn by both parties. His ill-concealed desire for
revenge is noticed by the Frisians, who anticipate it by themselves
attacking Hengest and his men whilst they are sleeping in the hall. This
is the night attack described in the _Fight at Finnsburg_. It would seem
that after a brave and desperate resistance Hengest himself falls in
this fight at the hands of the son of Hunlaf (66 [1143]), but two of his
retainers, Guthlaf and Oslaf, succeed in cutting their way through their
enemies and in escaping to their own land. They return with fresh
troops, attack and slay Finn, and carry his queen Hildeburh back to the
Daneland.

Folkwalda (62 [1089]), father of Finn.

Franks (70, 165 [1210, 2911]). Hygelac, king of the Geats, was defeated
and slain early in the sixth century, in his historical invasion of the
Netherlands, by a combined army of Frisians, Franks, and Hugs.

Freawaru (116 [2022]), daughter of Hrothgar and Wealhtheow. Beowulf
tells Hygelac that her father has betrothed her to Ingeld, prince of the
Heathobards, in the hope of settling the feud between the two peoples.
But he prophesies that the hope will prove vain: for an old Heathobard
warrior, seeing a Danish chieftain accompany Freawaru to their court
laden with Heathobard spoils, will incite the son of the former owner of
the plundered treasure to revenge, until blood is shed, and the feud is
renewed. That this was what afterwards befell, we learn from the Old
English poem _Widsith_. _See also_ ll. 83-5.

Friesland (65 [1126]), the land of the North Frisians.

Frieslands (135 [2356]), Frisian land (165 [2914]), the home of the West
Frisians.

Frisians. Two tribes are to be distinguished: 1. The North Frisians (61,
63 [1070, 1093]), the people of Finn. 2. The West Frisians (143, 165
[2502, 2911]), who combined with the Franks and Hugs and defeated
Hygelac, between 512 and 520 A.D.

Froda (117 [2025]), father of Ingeld. _See_ Freawaru.


GUTHLAF and Oslaf (66 [1148]). _See_ Finn.


HÆRETH (112, 114 [1929, 1981]), father of Hygd, wife of Hygelac.

Hæthcyn (139, 142, 165 [2433, 2481, 2924]), second son of Hrethel, king
of the Geats, and thus elder brother of Hygelac. He accidentally killed
his elder brother Herebeald with a bow-shot, to the inconsolable grief
of Hrethel. He succeeded to the throne at his father's death, but fell
in battle at Ravenwood (165 [2924]) by the hand of the Swedish King
Ongentheow.

Half-Danes (61 [1069]), the tribe to which Hnæf belongs. _See_ Finn.

Hama (69 [1198]). _See_ Brisings.

Healfdene (4 [57]), king of the Danes, son of Beowulf the Scylding, and
father of Hrothgar, "Healfdene's son" (16 [268]).

Heardred (126, 136-7 [2202, 2374-2387]), son of Hygelac and Hygd. While
still under age he succeeds his father as king of the Geats, Beowulf,
who has refused the throne himself, being his counsellor and protector.
He is slain by "Ongentheow's bairn" (137 [2386]), Onela, king of the
Swedes.

Heathobards, Lombards, the tribe of Ingeld, the betrothed of Freawaru,
Hrothgar's daughter (117 [2032]).

Heatholaf (27 [460]). _See_ Ecgtheow.

Helmings. "The Dame of the Helmings" (36 [620]) is Hrothgar's queen,
Wealhtheow.

Hemming. "The Kinsman of Hemming" is a name for Offa (112 [1944]) and
for his son Eomær (113 [1961]).

Hengest (62-5 [1083-1127]). _See_ Finn.

Heorogar (5 [61]), elder brother of Hrothgar (27 [467]), did not leave
his armour to his son Heoroward (124 [2158]); but Hrothgar gives it to
Beowulf, and Beowulf gives it to Hygelac.

Herebeald (139, 141 [2433, 2462]), eldest son of the Geat King Hrethel,
was accidentally shot dead with an arrow by his brother Hæthcyn.

Heremod (53, 99 [915, 1709]) is twice spoken of as a bad and cruel
Danish king. In the end he is betrayed into the hands of his foes.

Hereric may have been brother of Hygd, Hygelac's queen, for their son
Heardred is spoken of as "the nephew of Hereric" (126 [2206]).

Here-Scyldings (64 [1108]), Army-Scyldings, a name of the Danes.

Hetware (135, 165 [2362, 2915]), the Hattuarii of the _Historia
Francorum_ of Gregory of Tours and of the _Gesta Regum Francorum_, were
the tribe against which Hygelac was raiding when he was defeated and
slain by an army of Frisians, Franks, and Hugs.

Hildeburh (61, 64 [1071, 1114]). _See_ Finn.

Hnæf (61, 64 [1069, 1114]). _See_ Finn.

Hoc (62 [1076]). _See_ Finn.

Hrethel, a former king of the Geats; son of Swerting (70 [1202]), father
of Hygelac and grandfather of Beowulf (22 [374]), to whom he left his
coat of mail (26 [454]). He died of grief at the loss of his eldest son
Herebeald (139-42) [2429-2473], who was accidentally slain by his brother
Hæthcyn.

  [Transcriber's Note:
  Page 70 [l. 1202] text reads "Hygelac ... grandson of Swerting."
  Hrethel is not named.]

Hrethlings (167 [2959]), the people of Hrethel, the Geats.

Hrethmen (26 [445]), Triumph-men, the Danes.

Hrethric (69, 106 [1189, 1836]), elder son of Hrothgar and Wealhtheow.

Hrothgar. _See_ the Argument.

Hrothulf (59, 68 [1017, 1181]), probably the son of Hrothgar's younger
brother Halga (5 [61]). He lives at the Danish court. Wealhtheow hopes
that, if he survives Hrothgar, he will be good to their children in
return for their kindness to him. It would seem that this hope was not
to be fulfilled ("yet of kindred unsunder'd," 67 [1164]).

Hygd, daughter of Hæreth, wife of Hygelac, the king of the Geats, and
mother of Heardred. She may well be "the wife of aforetime" (177
[3149]).

Hygelac, third son of Hrethel (139 [2433]) and uncle to Beowulf, is the
reigning king of the Geats during the greater part of the action of the
poem. When his brother Hæthcyn was defeated and slain by Ongentheow at
Ravenwood (165 [2923]), Hygelac quickly went in pursuit and put
Ongentheow to flight; but although, as leader of the attack, he is
called "the banesman of Ongentheow" (114 [1986]), the actual slayer was
Eofor (142, 167 [2485, 2963]), whom Hygelac rewarded with the hand of
his only daughter (169 [2996]). Hygelac came by his death between 512
and 520 A.D., in his historical invasion of the Netherlands, which is
referred to in the poem four times (70, 135, 143, 165 [1207, 2356, 2502,
2911]).


ING (147 [2576]). _See_ Ingwines.

Ingeld (119 [2064]). _See_ Freawaru.

Ingwines (60, 77 [1044, 1319]), "friends of Ing," the Danes. Ing,
according to the Old English _Rune-Poem_, "was first seen by men amid
the East Danes"; he has been identified with Frea.


MERWING, The (165 [2920]), the Merovingian king of the Franks.


OFFA (113 [1949]). _See_ Thrytho.

Ohthere (136-7, 165 [2379-2393, 2927]), son of the Swedish King
Ongentheow, and father of Eanmund and Eadgils (_q.v._).

Onela, "Ongentheow's bairn" (137 [2386]) and elder brother of Ohthere,
is king of Sweden ("the helm of the Scylfings," 136 [2380]) at the time
of the rebellion of Eanmund and Eadgils. He invades the land of the
Geats, which has harboured the rebels, slays Heardred, son of Hygelac,
and then retreats before Beowulf. At a later time Beowulf avenges the
death of Heardred by supporting Eadgils, "son of Ohthere" (137 [2393]),
in an invasion of Sweden, in which Onela is slain. _See also_ Eadgils;
and compare the slaying of Ali by Athils on the ice of Lake Wener in the
Icelandic "Heimskringla."

Ongentheow, father of Onela and Ohthere, was a former king of the
Swedes. The earlier strife between the Swedes and the Geats, in which he
is the chief figure, is fully related by the messenger (164 [2891]) who
brings the tidings of Beowulf's death. In retaliation for the marauding
invasions of Onela and Ohthere (142 [2474]), Hæthcyn invaded Sweden, and
took Ongentheow's queen prisoner. Ongentheow in return invaded the land
of her captor, whom he slew, and rescued his wife (165 [2923]); but in
his hour of triumph he was attacked in his turn by Hygelac near
Ravenwood, and fell by the hand of Eofor (168 [2960]).


SCANEY (97 [1686]), Scede-lands (2 [19]), the most southern portion of
the Scandinavian peninsula, belonging to the Danes; used in our poem for
the whole Danish kingdom.

Scyld (1 [4]), son of Sheaf, was the mythical founder of the royal
Danish dynasty of Scyldings.

Scyldings, descendants of Scyld, properly the name of the reigning
Danish dynasty, is commonly extended to include the Danish people (3
[30]).

Scylfing: "the Scylfing" (167 [2967]), "the aged of Scylfings" (142
[2486]), is Ongentheow.

Scylfings (136 [2380]), the name of the reigning Swedish dynasty, was
extended to the Swedish people in the same way as "Scyldings" to the
Danes. Beowulf's kinsman Wiglaf is called "lord of Scylfings" (149
[2601]), and in another passage the name is apparently applied to the
Geats (170 [3004]); this seems to point to a common ancestry of Swedes
and Geats, or it may be that Beowulf's father Ecgtheow was a "Scylfing."


THRYTHO (112 [1931]), wife of the Angle King Offa and mother of Eomær,
is mentioned in contrast to Hygd, just as Heremod is a foil to Beowulf.
She is at first the type of a cruel, unwomanly queen. But by her
marriage with Offa, who seems to be her second husband, she is subdued
and changed until her fame even adds glory to his.


UNFERTH, son of Ecglaf, is the spokesman of Hrothgar, at whose feet he
sits. He is of a jealous disposition, and is twice spoken of as the
murderer of his own brothers (34, 67 [587, 1165]). Taunting Beowulf with
defeat in his swimming-match with Breca, he is silenced by the hero's
reply, and more effectually still by the issue of the struggle with
Grendel (57 [980]). Afterwards, however, he lends his sword Hrunting for
Beowulf's encounter with Grendel's mother (85, 104 [1465, 1808]).


WÆGMUNDINGS (149, 160 [2605, 2803]), the family to which both Beowulf
and Wiglaf belong. Their fathers, Ecgtheow and Weohstan, may have been
sons of Wægmund.

Wedermark (17 [298]), the land of the Weder-Geats, _i.e._ the Geats.

Weders, Weder-Geats (13, 86, 122 [225, 1492, 2120]), Geats.

Weland (26 [455]), the Völund of the Edda, the famous smith of Teutonic
legend, was the maker of Beowulf's coat of mail. See the figured casket
in the British Museum; and compare "Wayland Smith's Cave" near the White
Horse, in Berkshire.

Weohstan was the father of Beowulf's kinsman and faithful henchman
Wiglaf, and the slayer of Eanmund (149 [2601]).

Wonred, father of "Wulf the Wonreding" (167 [2964]), and of Eofor.

Wulf (167 [2964]). _See_ Eofor.

Wulfgar, "a lord of the Wendels" (20 [348]), is an official of
Hrothgar's court, where he is the first to greet Beowulf and his Geats,
and introduces them to Hrothgar.

Wythergyld (118 [2051]) is a warrior of the Heathobards.




THE MEANING OF SOME WORDS NOT COMMONLY USED NOW

(_Numbers refer to Pages_)

  [Transcriber's Note:
  In this and the previous section, page numbers in parentheses are
  accompanied by a line reference in brackets.]


  _A-banning, the work was_ (5) [74], orders for the work were given.
  _Arede_ (119) [2056], possess.
  _Atheling_, prince, noble, noble warrior.

  _Barm_, lap, bosom.
  _Behalsed_ (5 [63]), embraced by the neck.
  _Berne_, man, warrior, hero.
  _Bestead_ (143 [2499]), served.
  _Beswealed_, scorched, burnt.
  _Beswinked_, sweated.
  _Birlers_, cup-bearers.
  _Board_, shield.
  _Bode_, announce.
  _Bollen_, swollen, angry.
  _Boot_ (9 [158]), compensation.
  _Boun_ (18 [301]), made ready.
  _Braided_ (147 [2574]), drew, lifted.
  _Brim_, sea.
  _Brook_, use, enjoy.
  _Burg_, fortified place, stronghold, mount, barrow; protection;
    protector; family (163 [2886]).
  _Byrny_, coat of mail.

  _Devil-dray_, nest of devils. Cf. _squirrel's-dray_, common in Berks;
    used by Cowper.
  _Dreary_, bloody.
  _Dree_, do, accomplish, suffer, enjoy, spend (155 [2725]).

  _Ealdor_, chief, lord.
  _Eme_, uncle.
  _Eoten_, giant, monster, enemy.

  _Fathom_, embrace.
  _Feeless_, not to be atoned for with money.
  _Ferry_, bring, carry.
  _Fifel_, monster.
  _Flyting_, contending, scolding.
  _Fold_, the earth.
  _Forheed_, disregard.
  _Forwritten_, proscribed.
  _Frist_, space of time, delay.

  _Gar_, spear.
  _Graithly_, readily, well.

  _Halse_, neck.
  _Hand-shoal_, band of warriors.
  _Hery_, praise.
  _Hild-play_, battle.
  _Holm_, ocean, sea.
  _Holm-throng_, eddy of the sea.
  _Holt_, wood.
  _Hote_, call.
  _Howe_, mound, burial-mound.
  _Hythe_, ferry, haven.

  _Kemp_, champion, fighter.

  _Lithe_, slope.
  _Loom_, heirloom.
  _Low_ (133 [2320]), flame.
  _Lyke_, body.

  _Moody_, brave, proud.

  _Nicors_, sea-monsters.
  _Nithing_ (12 [193]), spite, malice.

  _O'erthinking_, overweening, arrogance.

  _Rail, railings_, coat, armour.
  _Rimed_, counted, reckoned.

  _Sea-lode_, sea-voyage.
  _Sin_, malice, hatred, hostility.
  _Skinked_, poured out.
  _Slot_, track.
  _Staple_, threshold.
  _Stone-bow_, arch of stone.
  _Sty_, stride, ascend, descend.
  _Sweal_, burn.

  _Through-witting_, understanding.

  _Undern_, from 9 o'clock till 12 o'clock; "at undren and at middai,"
    O.E. Miscellany.

  _Warths_, shores, still in use at Wick St. Lawrence, in Somerset.
  _Wick_, dwelling.
  _Wick-stead_, dwelling-place.
  _Wise_, direct, show.
  _Wit-lust_, curiosity.
  _Worth_, shall be.
  _Wreak_, utter.
  _Wyte_, blame, charge with.
  _Yare_, ready.
  _Yode_, went.




       *       *       *       *       *



Errors and Inconsistencies

   List of Names

      Dayraven, Ravenwood
        _both names hyphenated in body text_
      Freawaru
        _text reads "Ereawaru"_
      Hrethel ... at the loss of his eldest son Herebeald (139-42)
        _text reads "-41"_
      Wythergyld
        _name spelled "Withergyld" in body text_

   Glossary

      _Arede_ (119) [2056], possess.
        _text reads "(118)"_



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALE OF BEOWULF***


******* This file should be named 20431-8.txt or 20431-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/0/4/3/20431



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
